---
title: "ENGL 354 Vitanza"
progress_bar: false
---
class: center, middle

# Victor Vitanza, "Abandoned to Writing"
---
class: f35px
## What does Writing Want?

> There is the impotentiality (*atechne*, *adynamis*, *potenza*) for such a conversayshun, but I often doubt that my colligs [sic] can allow for themselves to be in such a relationship with the question, that is, With Language (Logos)! The full question becoming, What is it that language wants? With me? Now that the horizon by which we write is disappearing, being taken as place (writing space) from writers?

---
class: f31px
## *Awayves*?

> My colligs still will-to-control language. Like Paul Virilio, my colligs would have us stop this disappearance. How does anyone or any group stop, put the brakes on, the appearance of a third interval! Let's face it: The Quattrocento perspective that still informs today's notions of writing—and the teaching of writing—is passing *awayves*, just as the Ptolemaic system passed away. The waves are climbing higher and higher until they reach so far beyond the horizon that they fall up and *awayves*. And "we," with them. Up and *awayves*.

---
class: f29px
## Catastrophic Metamorphosis

> Life cum lives are undergoing a catastrophic metamorphosis. I mean, I agree with Virilio as well as with Jean Baudrillard. Whether or not we should feel good about all this, whether or not we should establish a composition committee to look into this matter, whether or not we should hunker down more so at the university level and tie down writing across the disciplines—for fear that such writing will be blown *awayves*—whether or not we should accept the fatal strategy that presents itself to us as we are being tossed in the sea storm of a horizon becoming a middle zone, is beside the (bye now) point.less. It's too late.

---
class: f32px
## Writing Wants?

> Perhapless, there are two possibilities here: "We" can start teaching writing precisely as the university needs it taught. Or "we" can attempt "to teach" writing the way "we" want. But there are, let us not forget, third (interval) *wayves*. And therefore, "we" should ask: What is it that writing wants? I suspect that "writing" does not want what either the uni-versity thinks it needs nor what "we" think we want.
>
> Taken seriously!? In an institution! Writing scares, frightens, threatens institutions!

---
class: f28px
## Just Wants

> On the contrary, at our institutions, we are taken far more than seriously. So-so-seriously. That's Why we would be suppressed so that we could dis/engage by *wayves* of "learning" students to write from their impotence while at the uni-versity and while graduating into yet other institutions! But then, Who says anything like this at any uni-versity! It is, after all, just silly!
>
>I will skip (rocks across the sur-face) what "we" might want writing to want. Writing just wants. Wants, W.ants. It's not that writing wants what "we" want when "we" know what "we" want! Rather, WRITING WANTS! Just WANTS.
---
class: f23px
## Huh?

> Each of you, therefore, will have to follow the conductive linkages t.here. If you understand the restricted notion of how the classical *enthymeme* works, then, you will have to come to understand how the general economical notion of affective conduction refuses (to) work. (For a historical understanding of this phenomenon, I am saying that I am refusing to work for you and your complicity in being disciplined.) At first, I will th.ink quickly across and by *wayves* of apparently isolated examples, but then go on to an extended example.
>
> \~\~\~\~\~\~\~
>
> It's too late: Neither the uni-versity nor you can stop this bacterial-viral-crystaline infection from sp.reading to y.our students. "It" comes not from some foreign, devil*u*sh notions about writing and community; rather, "it" comes from within "writing" itself! Hahahahahahaha. To write is to infect.

---
class: f28px
## Writing Wants Writers

> **What writing or composition wants is a writer! To invite someone to become a writer! What rhetoric wants is a body that comes to expressing itselphs. A writer. A body filled with tics that cannot but (not) write!** Twitchings.
> 
> Writing, however, is not ||||||||||||||||| (barcodes) nor is it //////////// (slashing of value). Only writers spawned by institutions write in this manner! Rhetoric||||||||||||||||||||| . . . //////////////Composition.
>
> Rather, writing is \~\~\~\~\~\~\~ \~\~\~\~\~\~\~ \~\~\~\~\~\~ \~\~\~\~\~\~ \~\~\~\~ \~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~ \~\~\~\~\~ \~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~ \~\~\~\~\~\~ \~\~\~\~\~\~\~. . . .

---
class: f22px
## Writing Has Not Yet Been Written

> "We" have yet to write "writing"! "We" may never write "writing," but "we" must start letting *writing* write. Such a writing cannot, should not, take place, and will not, unless under the most radical, still unthinkable, conditions . . . take place . . . in the university (or the schools). It is simply *not safe* for students to write "in" or "at" the university. Any university. What is taught at the university is not-writing.
>
> This is no mere rehash of what Bill Coles has said, though what he has said is, at least, a rebeginning. I am not working with the terms "art" or "craft"; nor am I interested in whether or not writing can be "taught" or "learned," though I earlier here misused the language and said "learning" students to write. Obviously what goes for writing in the academy *can be taught*! That's the problem! It is necessary to dis/engage by wayves of *abusio*. *Catachresis*. Rather, I prefer not to write, except at the outside, or at the threshold, of "writing" in terms of a third *a*place, *atopos*.
---
class: f30px
## Outside

> Writing has a chance "outside" the university. And yet, what is an "outside" of an institution! When the whole Oedi-pedagogical system known as Education (pedagogy) is insidiously and invidiously everywhere! On the streets. At home. In one's room. "We" must hope for a parauniversity with its per-versities. That is, its contrariness that cannot not flow toward transversalities. Away from disciplines and bureaucratic administrative minds. *Awayves* from accountability! *Between* systems and no systems. Smack dab on the *wayves*, *in* the uncanny, *in* the excluded middle.

