---
title: "ENGL 481 Flusser I"
progress_bar: false
---
class: center, middle

# Vilém Flusser, *Does Writing Have a Future?*
---
class: f26px
## No Future

> Writing, in the sense of placing letters and other marks one after another, appears to have little or no future. Information is now more effectively transmitted by codes other than those of written signs. WHat was once written can now be conveyed more effectively on tapes, records, films, videotapes, videodisks, or computer disks, and a great deal that could not be written until now can be noted down in these new codes. Information coded by these means is easier to produce, to transmit, to receive, and to store than written texts. Future correspondence, science, politics, poetry, and philosophy will be pursued more effectively through the use of these codes than through the alphabet or Arabic numerals. (3)

---
class: f36px
## Ordering Thought

> All writing is "right": it is a gesture of setting up and ordering written signs. And written signs are, directly or indirectly, signs for ideas. So writing is a gesture that aligns and arranges ideas. Anyone who writes must first have ideas. And written signs are the quotation marks of right thinking. On first encounter, a hidden motive appears behind writing: one writes to set one's ideas on the right path. (6)

---
class: f26px
## Mechanical

> All writing is orderly, and that leads directly to the contemporary crisis in writing. For there is something mechanical about the ordering, the rows, and machines do this better than people do. One can leave writing, this ordering of signs, to machines. I do not mean the sort of machines we already know, for they still require a human being who, by pressing keys arranged on a keyboard, orders textual signs into lines according to rules. I mean grammar machines, artificial intelligences that take care of this order on their own. Such machines fundamentally perform not only a grammatical but also a thinking function, and as we consider the future of writing and of thinking as such, this might well give us pause for thought. (6)

---
class: f27px
## Writing Against Entropy

> Information is the mirror image of entropy, the reverse of the tendency of all objects (the objective world as a whole) to decay into more and more probable situations and finally into a formless, extremely probably situation. However, this tendency toward entropy, inherent in all objects, may turn on itself and accidentally lead to improbable situations […]. The gesture of informing characteristically expresses the intention of a subject to negate the objective tendency toward entropy. One informs (produces improbable situations) to set spirit against material that tends, absurdly, toward heat death. Writing, like digging, presses this spirit into the object to inspire it, that is, to make it improbable. (12-3)

---
class: f36px
## Monument vs Quickness

> Our literature is not monumental (as, say Mesopotamian literature is). It does not demand consideration and contemplation. It is documentary, it teaches and instructs. Our literature wants doctors rather than wise mean. It is written quickly to be read quickly. And the speed explains the dynamics of the ever-increasing flow of literature in which we are swimming. (18)

---
class: f32px
## Numbers vs Letters

> Because letters are signs for spoken sounds, an alphabetic text is a score for an audible performance: it makes sounds visible. Numbers, on the other hand, are signs for ideas, for images seen with an inner eye (2 as a sign for the mental picture of a pair). Numbers can, of course, designate exceptionally abstract images. So letters codify acoustic perceptions, whereas numbers codify optical perceptions. Letters belong to the field of music, numbers to that of the visual arts. (24)

---
class: f24px
## Influence of Digital

> The instrument that best characterizes the contemporary upheaval is a counting device. The computer appears to be slowly (and inexorably) taking over one human intellectual function after another: calculation, logical thinking, decision making, forecasting. Under the influence of this counting device, science is drawing a picture of the world that is composed of countable pebbles (calculi), like a mosaic, and not only at the level of inanimate nature (atomic particles) but also at the level of the animate (gene). Even society is seen as a mosaic, within which the building blocks (individuals) link and detach themselves according to calculable rules. […] Faced with a problem, be it physical, biological, social, or psychological, we no longer try to describe it; rather we make a diagram of it. We don't think literally anymore, but numerically, no longer with the ear but with the eye. Our continuing use of names rather than numbers should be considered a passing stage. (26)