---
title: "ENGL 355 Field Work #3"
progress_bar: false
---
class: middle, center

# Field Work #3
---
class: f55px

## Prompt

> Bring in a sentence (either your own or someone else’s) that is **blue**. Bring one that is .red[**red**].
---
class: f33px
## Dr. Pilsch

**Blue** "We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far." (HP Lovecraft)

.red[**Red**] "We stand on the far promontory of centuries!... What is the use of looking behind us, since our task is to smash the mysterious portals of the impossible? Time and Space died yesterday. We live already in the absolute, since we have already created the eternal omnipresent speed." (FT Marinetti)
---
class: f32px
## Kamryn

**Blue** It wasn’t that I couldn’t live without him, physically I suppose that I could, but his absence surged my mind into an inescapable vortex that dulled any gleam of hope I once had for my future.

.red[**Red**] All at once the scene around me became engrained into my mind with his betrayal becoming more and more obvious at the passing of each second; my heart rate skyrocketed as the blood rushed to my face causing my sweaty palms to make themselves into determined fists, this ends here.
---
class: f38px
## Ava

**Blue** Until the underwater current subsided, he would look with a steady gaze at the undulating curl of the water's surface.

.red[**Red**] He roars and rages against the wind, wailing to the world over the ripeness of riots and ruin.
---
class: f30px
## Armineh

**Blue** Sighs, short and infrequent, were exhaled,  
And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.  
-TS Eliot, "The Wasteland"

.red[**Red**] "Delighted and surprised, I embraced her; but as I imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and I thought that I held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel."  
-Mary Shelley, *Frankenstein*, ch. 5. 
---
class: f38px
## Kami

**Blue** Three hunters across the lawn.

.red[**Red**] Kewl c u l8r n00b.
---
class: f40px
## Adriana

**Blue** "Some nights you drink tea,  
some nights you drink whiskey."  

-Atticus

.red[**Red**] "How *dare* you."
---
class: f36px
## Mindi

**Blue** "Oh I am very weary, Though tears no longer flow; My eyes are tired of weeping, My heart is sick of woe."  

-Anne Bronte

.red[**Red**] "Do not go gentle into that good night; Old age should burn and rave at close of day; Rage, rage against the dying of the light."  

-Dylan Thomas
---
class: f36px
## Shelby

**Blue** Buffalo buffalo that Buffalo buffalo buffalo, buffalo Buffalo buffalo.

.red[**Red**] All the faith he had had had had no effect on the outcome of his
life.
---
class: f40px
## Will

.red[**Often the solution to a problem is the simplest one.**] **At least that’s what I think, I could be wrong though.**
---
class: f26px
## Lauren

**Blue** "It is a mirror which no stone can crack, whose quicksilver will never wear off, whose gilding Nature continually repairs; no storms, no dust, can dim its surface ever fresh;—a mirror in which all impurity presented to it sinks, swept and dusted by the sun's hazy brush."  

-*Walden*, Henry David Thoreau

.red[**Red**] "That devilish Iron Horse, whose ear-rendering neigh is heard throughout the town, has muddied the Boiling Spring with his foot, and he it is that has browsed off all the woods on Walden shore; that Trojan horse, with a thousand men in his belly, introduced by the mercenary Greeks!"  

-*Walden*, Henry David Thoreau
---
class: f34px
## Rebecca

**Blue**  
You look very well in that new little blue hat  
There's some little girls who know how to behave  
And they know what to wear  
And I'm saying thank heaven for that.

.red[**Red**] Red the blood of angry men!
---
class: f33px
## Anna

**Blue** “The air was fresh, sweet, and very cold. Ice edged the streams, and small pools were completely frozen over.”  

-*Eragon*, Christopher Paolini

.red[**Red**] “The sweat was sticky on my brown body... I heard the truck and turned to see it chugging up the dusty goat path.”  

-*Bless Me, Ultima*, Rudolfo Anaya
---
## Zipporah

**Blue** "For beauty is nothing but the beginning of terror, which we are still just able to endure."

-Rainer Maria Rilke
 
.red[**Red**] "He forcefully pinned me down on his bed and raped me as I begged him to stop. He didn’t."

-Alone