---
title: ENGL 353 Erasmus V
progress_bar: true
---
class: center, middle

.title-block[
# Desiderius Erasmus

## Abundance of Subject-Matter
]
---
class: f26px
## Enrichment of Material

> The first method on enriching what one has to say on a subject is to take something that can be expressed in brief and general terms, and expand it and separate it into its constituent parts. This is just like displaying some object for sale first of all through a grill or inside a wrapping, and then unwrapping it and opening it out and displaying it fully to the gaze.
>
> Here is an example of the method. Let us take the sentence: *He wasted all his substance in riotous living*. This is expressed in summary fashion, and is, so to speak, wrapped up. We can open it up by enumerating all the different types of possessions and setting out the various ways of wasting them: ... (II. Method 1)
---
class: f23px
## Amplification in Action

> We may include here the kind of example where some whole made up of subordinate parts rather than of a group of disparate items is separated out into its parts. Take the sentence: He is a total monster. This will be filled out by first dividing the man into body and mind, and then touching on the separate parts of the body followed by the separate parts of the mind: He is a monster both in mind and in body; whatever part of mind or body you consider, you will find a monster - quivering head, rabid eyes, a dragon's gape, the visage of a Fury, distended belly, hands like talons ready to tear, feet distorted, in short, view his entire physical shape and what else does it all present but a monster? Observe that tongue, observe that wild beast's roar, and you will name it a monstrosity, probe his mind, you will find a horror; weigh his character, scrutinize his life, you will find all monstrous; and, not to pursue every point in detail, through and through he is nothing but a monster. (II. Method 1)
---
class: f25px
## Methods 2-4

> The second method of variation is very like the first. It arises when we are not satisfied with stating the final outcome and leaving preceding events to be deduced, but rehearse in detail everything which led up to the final result.

> The third method again is not so very different from the second. In the third we do not set out the fact unadorned, but look for causes of it, even some distance back, and try to explain what gave rise to it …

> The fourth method is not all that different again. Here we do not simply state some situation, but enumerate all the circumstances that accompany it or result from it.
---
class: f25px
## Method in Action

> For example: We shall blame you for the war, which may be enlarged by saying: The emptying of the treasury on barbarous troops, the breaking of the youth of the country by hardship, the trampling underfoot of the harvests, the abduction of cattle, the burning of farm and Village on every side, the deserted fields, tumbled walls, looted homes, plundered shrines, old men left childless, children fatherless, mothers widowed, girls shamefully raped, the morals of the young ruined by licence, so many deaths, so many sorrows, so many tears, the extinction of the arts, the suppression of law, the obliteration of religion, the total confusion of every divine and human value, the undermining of all civil discipline, all this train of evils, I say, which is born of war, we shall write down to your account alone, if, on your advice, war is declared. (II. Method 4)
---
class: skipped,f23px

## Methods We Skipped

1. Vividness ("to bring before the eyes")
	* Description of Things
	* Description of Persons
	* Description of Places
	* Description of Times
1. Digression
	* "handling of a topic which does have a contribution"
	* "used to attack someon, or for adornment, delight, or preparation"
1. Epithets
	* "the epithet is a differenetiating adjunct to a proper noun, which may enhance, detract, or particularize"
	* "Ulysses, originatior of foul deceits"
1. Circumstances (*peristases*)
	* "Non-personal and external details"
	* "amplification or building up, and extenuation or toning down"
---
class: others

## Methods 9&10

1. Amplification
	* "In which one advances by regular steps not only to the maximum, but even in a way beyond the maximum"
	* "in which we heap up circumstances' while observing some kind of order, and let one run on from another so arranged that the next thing is always greater than the one that went before"
	* "comparison gets its effect by starting from something less striking"
	* "the procedure by which we take the most dreadful deeds and rouse the strongest resentment against them, and then deliberately tone them down so that what follows may seem even more serious"
	* "Another method of build-up is the piling up of words and phrases meaning the same thing."
	* "There are just as many ways of toning down what we have to say as there are of building it up."
1. Invention Propositions
	* "The tenth method of expansion depends on inventing as many propositions as possible. I am Speaking of rhetorical propositions or themes, which are demonstrated to be true by the exposition of arguments."
