---
title: ENGL 353 Erasmus VI
progress_bar: true
---
class: center, middle

.title-block[
# Desiderius Erasmus

## On Examples
]
---
class: f31px
## Roots

> The eleventh method of enriching our style depends on the accumulation of proofs and arguments. The Greek word for these is *πιστεις* [reasons for belief]. Different reasons can be brought forward to confirm one and the same proposition, and the reasons themselves can be supported by further arguments.
>
>Proofs fall into two classes: *εντεχνοι* [of the art], invented or artificial proofs, and *ατεχνοι* [not of the art], given proofs. (II. Method 11)
---
class: f23px
## Commonplaces

> Generally speaking, arguments are derived from definition or defining formulae, from description, from exposition of the meaning of a word, which is a form of definition, or from things which definition by its very nature includes: genus, species, properties, differentiating characteristics, subdivision, classification (this last takes various forms, for example, a consideration of aspects such as commencement, completion, development); or from deductions based on similar or dissimilar situations; from contraries, contradictions, consequences, related propositions, causes, results, comparisons ... and from self-evident statements ... Anyone training with a view to acquiring eloquence will have to look at all the possible topics in turn, go knocking from door to door so to speak, to see if anything can be induced to emerge; but with practice the right ones will come to suggest themselves naturally [*sponte*, automatically], without this process being necessary. (II. Method 11)
---
class: f35px
## Usage of Examples

> In the development of *copia*, then, illustrations play a leading role, whether the speech is the sort that debates what action should be taken, or urges to a particular course of action, or is intended to console someone in grief, or is laudatory or vituperative; in short, whether one is trying to convince one's audience, move them, or give them pleasure. (II. Method 11)
---
class: f31px
## Variety of Variety

> It is not enough to provide oneself with an enormous and very varied supply of illustrations, and to have them ready for use at a moment's notice; one must also be able to handle them with variety. Variety can be provided by the very nature of the illustrative examples themselves. They can be things done or said in the past, or be derived from the customs of various nations. There will be differences according to whether they are drawn from historians, or from poets ..., or from philosophers..., or from the theologians, or the books of the Bible ... (II. Method 11)
---
class: f29px
## Expanding Examples

> But examples not only acquire variety in our handling of them; they are also enlarged and expanded. I shall indicate some of the ways of doing this: first by "commendation," when we introduce a section in which we praise the incident, or the author, or the nation from which the illustration is drawn. If one quoted something done or said by a Spartan, for example, one could preface the anecdote by remarking that this people was always superior to the rest in wisdom and in military and civil organization, and abounded in splendid moral object-lessons. (II. Method 11)
---
class: f21px
## Judgments

> As I said, with examples we can include judgments […] These are […] striking sayings of famous writers, of nations, of wise men, of distinguished citizens. A great supply can be discovered in the celebrated poets of old, also in the historiographers, the philosophers, and mystic writings. Judgments accordingly show the same variety as examples. Collections of such things have been made by some of the Greeks, notably by one Stobaeus. There are also apophthegms of wise men, like "The sayings of famous men," and the things recorded by Plutarch. Here too the material is varied: as regards subject-matter, we have military and philosophical sayings; as regards speakers, we have kings, wise men, ordinary citizens; as regards tone, we have serious, humorous, and witty sayings. We can include here proverbs, whether extracted from authors or from popular speech. National customs are in my opinion no different from examples; oracles and replies from higher powers can certainly be included with judgments, for example, if one were to approve Socrates as a wise man, because this was the judgment pronounced by the oracle of Apollo (II. Method 11)
---
class: f28px
## Maxims

> Next we come to Sententiae or maxims, which are not extracted from authors but invented by ourselves to suit the matter in hand. These can be introduced into any part of the speech. One passage often generates quite a. number of maxims. They can occur in the narration and in passages intended to stir the emotions of the audience, as well as in the proof section. Quite often the transition from one section to another is made by means of one of these terse sayings. By introducing them in appropriate contexts you will provide yourself with a not inconsiderable source of copia, which at the same time will lend your speech weight or attractiveness. (II. Method 11)
---
class: f24px
## Elaboration

> […] the procedure known as 'elaboration.' In this we dwell for some time on the same point, vary the same maxim in all kinds of different ways, and thus enrich it. We may employ variation in language, expressing the same sentiment in different words and different figures of speech; or variation in delivery, using different facial expressions, gestures, and tone of voice; or variation in treatment, first saying something in our own person, then putting it into the mouth of someone who expresses it rather differently; or we can put forward an argument coolly, and then produce it in a fierce and heated manner.
>
> A complete 'elaboration' contains seven parts: Statement, reason, rephrasing of statement (to which one can add the reason restated), statement from the contrary, comparison, illustrative example, conclusion.
---
class: f22px
## Other Kinds of Examples

* Fables 
	* "similar to legendary tales, except that fables are more immediately attractive and make the point more effectively"
* Dreams 
	* "Some people invent dreams as well, though possibly these should not be introduced except in display speeches […] or when we narrate them as genuine visions in order to encourage or deter our hearers"
* Fictional Narratives
	* "If entirely fictional narratives are introduced as if they were true because they will help us to get our point across, we must make them as much like the real thing as possible"
	* "Stories which are invented to raise a laugh are the more entertaining the further they are from the truth"
* Scriptural Allegories
	* "Whenever we are endeavouring to turn men towards piety or from wickedness, we shall find very useful anecdotes drawn from the Old or the New Testament"
