---
title: "ENGL 481 Kittler"
progress_bar: false
---
class: center, middle

# Friedrich Kittler, From *Gramophone, Film, Typewriter*
---
class: f29px
## Collapse All Media

> *Optical fiber networks*. Soon people will be connected to a communication channel which can be used for any kind of media—for the first time in history or for the end of history. When films, music, phone calls, and texts are able to reach the individual household via optical fiber cables, the previously separate media of television, radio, telephone, and mail will become a single medium, standardized according to transmission frequency and bit format. Above all, the optoelectronic channel will be immunized against disturbances that might randomize beautiful patterns of bits behind the images and sounds. (101)

---
class: f23px
## Surfaces

> But even now, before the end, something is coming to an end. The general digitalization of information and channels erases the difference between individual media. Sound and image, voice and text have become mere effects on the surface, or, to put it better, the interface for the consumer. Sense and the senses become mere glitter. Their media-produced glamour will last throughout the transitional period as a waste product of strategic programs. In computers everything becomes number: imageless, soundless, and wordless quantity. And if the optical fiber network reduces all formerly separate data flows to one standardized digital series of numbers, any medium can be translated into numbers nothing is impossible. Modulation, transformation, synchronization; delay, memory, transposition; scrambling, scanning, mapping-a total connection of all media on a digital base erases the notion of the medium of hooking up technologies to people, absolute knowledge can run as an endless loop. (102)

---
class: f20px, no-margin
## Jumbo Jet as Prototype

> But right now there are still media; there is still entertainment. One is informed-mainly, unfortunately, thanks to jumbo jets. In the jumbo jet, media are more densely connected than in most places. They remain separate, however, according to their technological standard, frequency, user allocation, and inter- face. The crew is connected to radar screens, diode displays, radio beacons, and nonpublic channels. The crew members have deserved their professional earphones. Their replacement by computers is only a question of time. But the passengers can benefit only from yesterday's technology and are entertained by a canned media mixture. With the exception of books, that ancient medium which needs so much light, all the entertainment techniques are represented. The passengers' ears are listlessly hooked up to one-way earphones, which are them- selves hooked up to tape recorders and thereby to the record industry. Their eyes are glued to Hollywood movies, which in turn must be connected to the advertising budget of the airline industry-otherwise they would not so regularly begin with takeoffs and landings. Not to mention the technological medium of the food industry to which the mouths of the passengers are connected. A multi-media embryonic sack supplied through channels or navels that all serve the purpose of screening out the real background: noise, night, and the cold of an unlivable outside. Against that there is muzak, movies, and microwave cuisine. (102)

---
class: f27px
## Computation

>  Above all, the systems do not compute data. They do not produce an output which, under computer control, would transform any algorithm into any interface effect, to the point at which people will no longer be able to make sense of their senses. Right now only the transmission quality of the storage media, which in the connected media systems represents the content, is being computed. A compromise between engineers and sales people regulates the degree to which the sound from a television set can be poor, the pictures in the cinema can be fuzzy, or a beloved voice on the telephone can be filtered. The dependent variable of this compromise is what we take for our sense perception. (103)

---
class: f30px
## Fabrication

> But what we take for our sense perception has to be fabricated first. The domination and the connection of technical media presuppose a particular kind of coincidence, in Lacan's terms: something had to stop not writing itself. Long before the electrification of the media, that is, even before their electronic end, there were modest, merely mechanical apparatuses. Those apparatuses could neither amplify nor transmit, but they could still store data for our sense perception: there was the silent movie for sights and Edison's phonograph for sound. (103)

---
class: f25px
## Style to Storage

> What was new about the storage capability of the phonograph and cinematograph—and both names refer, not accidentally, to writing—was their ability to store time: as a mixture of audio frequencies in the acoustic realm, as a movement of single picture sequences in the optic realm. Time, however, is what determines the limits of all art. The quotidian data flow must be arrested before it can become image or sign. What is called style in art is only the switchboard of these scannings and selections. The same switchboard also controls those arts that administrate in writing a serial, that is, a temporally transposed data flow. In order to store the sound sequences of speech, literature has to arrest them in the system of twenty-six letters and thereby exclude noise sequences from the beginning. (104)

---
class: f28px
## History?

> What soon will end in the monopoly of bits and fiber optics began with the monopoly of writing. History was that homogenous field which, as a subject in school curricula, included only cultures with written language. Mouths and graphisms dropped out into prehistory. Otherwise events and their stories could not have been connected. The commands and judgments, the announcements and prescriptions that gave rise to mountains of corpses—military and juridical, religious and medical—all went through the same channel that held the monopoly on the descriptions of those mountains of corpses. This is why anything that ever happened ended up in libraries. (105)

---
## Ong

> Accordingly, today oral history confronts the writing monopoly of the historians; accordingly, a media theoretician like Walter J. Ong, who, particularly in his function as a Jesuit priest, must take a professional interest in the spirit of the Pentecostal mystery, celebrates a primal orality of tribal cultures, as opposed to the secondary orality of our media acoustics. But that kind of research was inconceivable as long as the opposite of "history" used to be simply (again in Goethe's terms) "legend." Prehistory disappeared in its mythical name; Goethe's definition of literature did not even have to mention optical or acoustical data flows. And under pretechnical, though literary, conditions even legends, those spoken segments of what had happened, could last only when they had been fixed in writing. Since it has become possible, however to record on tape the epics of those last Homeric bards, who until recently were wandering through Serbia and Croatia, oral mnemotechniques or cultures can be reconstructed in an altogether new way. Then even Homer's rosy-fingered Eos is transformed from a goddess into a piece of chrome dioxide, stored in the memory of those rhapsodists and could be combined with other pieces into whole epics. Primal orality or oral history are technological shadows of the apparatuses which they can document, only, however, after the end of the writing monopoly. (105-6)

---
class: f34px
## Writing as Storage

> Writing can store only writing, no more, no less. The holy books testify to this fact. The second book of Moses, chapter twenty, fixes a copy of what Jaweh originally had written with his own finger on two stone tablets: the law. Of the thunder and lightning, the dense cloud and very powerful trumpet that accompanied the writing-down on the holy mountain of Sinai, the Bible could store nothing but mere words. (106)

---
class: f22px
## Private Reading

> And what applies to writing also applies to reading. Even if the alphabeticized individual of the "writer" finally had to fall out of the private exteriority of his handwriting into the anonymous exteriority of print in order to secure beyond distance and death "what is left of him and his propagation"—alphabeticized individuals called "readers" could nevertheless reverse these exteriorizations. "If one reads correctly," Novalis wrote, "the words in us will be unfolded into a visible world." And his friend Schlegel added that "one believes one hears what one merely reads."2 Perfect alphabetism was supposed to supplement precisely those optical and acoustical data flows which refused to stop not writing themselves under the monopoly of writing. In order to naturalize writing, writing had to be made painless, and reading had to become silent. Educated people who could skim letters were provided with sights and sounds.
>
> Around 1800 the book became both film and record simultaneously—not, however, as a media technological reality, but only in the imaginary of the readers' souls. (108)

---
class: f23px
## Memory

> As soon as optical and acoustical data can be put into some kind of media storage, people no longer need their memory. Its "liberation" is its end. As long as the book had to take care of all serial data flows, however, words trembled with sensuality and memory. All the passion of reading consisted of hallucinating a meaning between letters and lines: the visible or audible world of romantic poetry. And all passion of writing was (according to E.T.A. Hoffmann) the poet's wish "to pronounce the inner being" of these hallucinations "in all its glowing colors, shadows, and lights" in order to and "hit the favorable reader as if with an electric shock."
>
> Electricity itself has brought this to an end. If memories and dreams, the dead and the specters have become technically reproducible, then the hallucinatory power of reading and writing has become obsolete. Our realm of the dead is no longer in books, where it was for such a long time. (110)

---
class: f27px
## Medium medium

> Media always already provide the appearances of specters. […]
> 
> And the tapping specters of the spiritistic seances, with their messages from the realm of the dead, appeared quite promptly at the moment of the invention of the Morse alphabet in 1837. Promptly, photographic plates-even and especially with the camera shutter closed-provided images of ghosts or specters which, in their black-and-white fuzziness, only emphasized the moments of resemblance. Finally, one of the ten uses Edison predicted (in 1878, in the *North American Review*) for the recently invented phonograph was to preserve the "last words of the dying." (111)

---
class: f27px
## Typewriter

> In a standardized text, paper and body, writing and soul fall apart. Type- writers do not store an individual, their letters do not transmit a beyond which could be hallucinated by perfect alphabets as meaning. Everything which, since Edison's two innovations, can be taken over by the technical media disappears out of the typescripts. The dream of a real, visible, or audible world arising from the words is over. The historical synchronicity of cinema, phonography, and typewriter separated the data flows of optics, acoustics, and writing and rendered them autonomous. The fact of this differentiation is not altered by the recent ability of electric or electronic media to bring them back together and combine them. (113-4)

---
class: f27px
## Everything is Number

> The age of media—as opposed to the history that ends it—moves in jerks, like Turing's paper ribbon. From the Remington, via the Turing machine, to microelectronics; from mechanization, via automatization, to the implementation of a writing which is cypher and not sense--one century sufficed to transform the ancient storage monopoly of writing into the omnipotence of integrated circuits. Like Turing's correspondents, everything goes from the analogous machine to the discrete. The compact disc digitalizes the gramophone, the video camera the cinema. All data flows end in a state *n*  of Turing's universal machine; numbers and figures become (in spite of romanticism) the key to all creatures. (117-8)