---
title: "ENGL 481 Flusser II"
progress_bar: false
---
class: center, middle

# Vilém Flusser, *Does Writing Have a Future?*
---
class: f29px
## Type?

> Since writing […] was invented, people have been typographing. Gutenberg didn't really invent anything: printing would have been possible by the middle of the second millenium B.C. in this sense. All the technical requirements […] were then already in place. But there was as yet no printing because no one was yet aware that by drawing letters, one was dealing with types. Written signs were taken to be characters. "Type-identifying" thought had not yet pressed itself into consciousness. Gutenberg's great deed was the discovery of the type inherent in alphanumeric script. (48)

---
class: f24px
## Example

> The difficulty of achieving standardizing consciousness can be illuminated through an example. The medieval dispute over universals concerned the problem of comparison. What do I do when I compare a table to a chair? Do these two objects have something in common, something to be revealed as typical? Perhaps their shared "furnitureness"? That was the view of the realists. Or must I accept that the characteristics of these two things are not comparable and that I have to pluck a word out of thin air (such as the word *furniture*) to induce a comparison where no real one is possible. That was the view of the nominalists. For the former, the typical, the universal is actually embedded in particulars and can be discovered: *universalia sunt realia*. Hence the designation "realists." For the latter, there is nothing behind particulars, and the typical is nothing but a name we invent to facilitate comparison: *universalia sunt nomina*. Hence their designation "nominalists." (48)
---
class: f24px
## Writing for the Apparatus

> One way to anticipate the kind of thinking that characterized the informatic revolution is to observe those who manipulate the apparatus, setting the new signs into electromagnetic fields. The word *program* is the Greek equivalent of the Latein *praescriptio* and the German *Vorschrift*. Are these people continuing to write or starting again? Are the contemporary reactionaries on the mark when they assert that nothing has changed fundamentally, that the essential always stays the same? To whom are these people writing? For they are not writing past a conclusion to another human being. Rather they write with and for apparatuses. Didn't the earlier discussion show that writing to other people was the essential thing about writing? So the essence of writing has changed for these people; it is another writing, in need of another name: programming. For reactionaries, this is not just uncomfortable; it is terrifying. (55)
---
class: f23px
## Circling

> All our languages have the same inflected character (although German, for example, tends toward agglutination, as in the *Donaudampfsciffarhtskaptain* [Danube-steam-ship-journey-captain] and English towards isolation, such as "put" or "set"). But each of our languages manipulates this structure in its own unique way. Each has its own grammar. That enables us to relocate from our own language into another without falling out of the net that supports us. And translation is a powerful method foe expanding and deepening our universe. For languages are open systems: elements of other languages (words and rules) may be incorporated without loss of character. [Translation enables us to say something we've said before in our own language differently](https://translate.google.com/). The variety, the structural similarity, and the functional difference among our languages means our universe is always open to a creative renewing of ideas, feelings, desires, and acts. (65)

---
class: f27px
## Electronic Poetry

> At first glance, it looks as though there could also be nonalphabetic language games. Can't apparatuses play with language just as with images and musical sounds? Could there not be electronic poetry along with electronic images and electronic music? It's possible to think of programs that produce linguistic modulations automatically that far surpass alphabetic modulation in poetic force. Such programming could [liberate alphabetic poetry](https://twitter.com/losttesla?lang=en) form the elitist prison it occupies today and, mindful of the decaying alphabet, lead to finer, stronger speech. Should this strategy be employed we could expect psalms and [epics](https://twitter.com/str_voyage) such as those of David and Homer to be brought to the next level. A new song to the Lord would then be at hand. (71-2)
---
class: f23px
## Bot Poetry

> We would accordingly expect two kinds of poetry in the sense of a language game. On one hand, there will be artificial intelligences that speak, presenting a continuous program of new poems in keeping with their programs. And on the other hand, information designers will, with the help of a permutation game, cause poems—[coded alphabetically or not](https://twitter.com/infinitedeserts)—to light up on our screens before us at a breathtaking pace, like some kind of artificial Eliot or Rilke. […] In light of the unimaginable number of perceptual and experiential models that will flood over society in the form of images and sound, it is doubtful whether language, by then forming no more than a background code, will still be used to model perception and experience. The forces of poetry will then probably be concentrating on nonlinguistic codes, some of them still unknown. Such codes will no longer be read but will have to be decoded in another way. This raises the now unavoidable question of the future of reading. (76)
---
class: f29px
## Poet as Information Designer

> A poet writing alphabetically directs his lines toward a reader. He constructs an experiential model for people who presumably read to the end before starting to live in accordance with it. That means that the poet who writes alphabetically writes above all in the first instance to critics. The new poet is not facing such an audience. The models he builds are to be received, changed, and sent on. He is playing a permutation game that he received from earlier poets and that he will pass on the future poets. In the future, there will be no criticism in the traditional sense of the word. (76-7)
