---
title: ENGL 354 Booth
progress_bar: false
---
class: center, middle

# Wayne Booth <br> "The Revival of Rhetoric"
---
class: f31px
## Two Rhetorics

> The word "rhetoric" has for a long time served for both the study of the art of persuasion and for the art itself; Aristotle's *Rhetoric*, upper-case, is still unsurpassed, but take away the capital letter and Aristotle's rhetoric is often very bad indeed, at least as we view it. In the second sense rhetoric has never had a real quantitative revival because it has always thrived; but in the first sense we seem to be in the midst of a revival of rhetoric unmatched in the twentieth century. (8)
---
class: f32px
## What is Rhetoric Today?

> What, exactly, are we reviving? As applied to art, the term is today given every conceivable degree of narrowness and generality, meaning anything from mere ornamental figures that can be tacked on a discourse or subtracted at will to the whole range of all possible forms of discourse; as systematic study, rhetoric may be anything from a classification of ornamental figures to the theory of man as a logos-possessing animal. (8)
---
class: f24px
## Value of Rhetoric?
> What is worse, one cannot even now, after nearly a decade of revived popularity, predict whether the term will be used to refer to something good or something bad. In publications for freshmen it has recently been an O.K.-term. Yet it is still used in ways that might well deter us from calling ourselves "Professors of Rhetoric." Listen to Malcolm Muggeridge, in a recent Esquire article: "Like a man in a dark place without a lantern, Church- ill in his war memoirs has to fall back on shouting-that is, rhetoric, which is a factor of power rather than of understanding. If the Sermon on the Mount had been expressed rhetorically it would have made little impact, and that only at the moment of delivery.... Churchill's rhetoric, like Henry V's in Shakespeare's play, was essential for war purposes, but proves increasingly disastrous as a literary style." (8)
---
class: f21px
## The Age of Rhetoric

>  Here, as in much of current usage, rhetoric is still bombast, mere propaganda, perhaps necessary for the affairs of men but necessarily tainted, anti-literary. Now obviously I did not come here to plead for a revival of such stuff. But I might well have come to describe how it feels to live in an age dominated by it. A case could be made for the claim that we live in the most rhetorical age of all time, if by rhetoric we mean whatever men do to change each other's minds without giving good reasons for change. I have in mind not only our fantabulous annual expenditures on advertising and public relations and political campaigns, though these alone might brand us, quantitatively, as the most rhetorical age of all time. I am thinking even more about how image building and propaganda have come to dominate fields where traditionally one could expect to find not blandishment or trickery but either solid action or genuine argument. The hand that used to guide the plow now pens the Agricultural Association Press Release. The warrior's sword is now either literally a typewriter or, if still in fact a destructive weapon, one that is wielded not so much to win battles as to change men's minds. (8)
---
class: f29px
## No Substance

>  I could go on through almost every part of our lives and show a similar reliance on suasion rather than substance. In journalism we find traditional notions of news accuracy replaced more and more, especially in the news magazines, by standards of rhetorical effectiveness; in place of the facts we are titillated and aroused by weekly collections of little short  stories, rhetorically organized to sell an editorial point of view. Or again, our notions of personal worth, once decided by such hard substantive matters as moral virtue, or family history, or money in the bank, are now settled rhetorically (8-9)
---
class: f30px
## Rhetoric of Conclusions
> Wherever one looks one is likely to find, in place of a coherent effort to move from evidence to conclusions, an out- pouring of what one of my colleagues calls a mere rhetoric of conclusions. Controversy is conducted as if all strong effects were equally valuable; to shock or simply to win are more important than the discovery of truth. I announce no secrets here, of course; many of our most prominent controversialists have explicitly repudiated reason in the name of rhetorical effects like shock or outrage. (9)
---
class: f25px
## Bad Rhetoric Society

>  In short, it is not difficult to find signs that we are a rhetorical age, if we mean by that- once again-an age in which men try to change each other's minds without giving good reasons for change. I know of no past culture where power was so persistently thought of as power to manipulate men's minds; where beauty was so persistently tested by mere popularity or saleability; where the truth of propositions was so persistently judged by whether this or that group accepts them; where notions of human greatness were so persistently reduced to the question of fame or "national luminosity"; where, finally, educational goals and methods were so persistently reduced to the notion of conditioning or imposition of already formed ideas or practices upon an infinitely malleable material. (9)
---
class: f28px
## Good Rhetoric vs Bad
> But beneath the differences there is general agreement that to engage with one's fellow men in acts of mutual persuasion, that is, of mutual inquiry, is potentially a noble thing. Indeed, none of the corruptions found in our rhetorical time would even be possible in a society which had not also laid itself open to the great virtues of moral and intellectual suasion when properly used. Consider once again, for example, my summary description of our rhetorical age. One can easily translate it, proposition by proposition, into a description of a kind of utopia. (10)
---
class: f24px
## Good Rhetoric Society

> I can think of no previous society in which questions of political power were so persistently referred to the people for consultation and decision; where questions of beauty were so often decided not by arbitrary rules imposed by an elite but by reference to a genuine capacity of art works to please those who experience them; where questions of truth were so often tested by debate rather than settled by decree; where notions of human greatness were so consistently determined not by fiat of an hereditary aristocracy or plutocracy but by reference to standards testable on the popular pulse; where, finally, educational goals and methods were tested so constantly against practical experience, and where it was unfailingly assumed that, since all men are educable-that is, subject to good rhetoric-there is no limit to the good that can be done through improving the rhetoric of education. (10)
---
class: f38px
## Liberation Through Rhetoric

> Would not such a society-fully as rhetorical as the earlier one-be a noble thing indeed? All of the evils of a rhetorical age are thus corruptions of tendencies that might be ennobling, or at least liberating. (10)
---
class: f24px
## Why Bad Rhetoric?
> Why is it, then, that so much of what we see about us, so much that is done in the name of advertising, of news reporting, of political campaigning, of education, is so cheap, so obviously aimed at persuasion without justification? If I thought I could get away with it here, I might intone an answer something like this: the bad rhetoric of our rhetorical time can be blamed on our almost total failure to develop good rhetorical theory adequate to our needs. I could not get away with such oversimplification, because you are all aware of how little can be changed, directly, by any theory, good or bad. But perhaps I can get away with a statement only slightly less forceful: of all the causes of our rhetorical shoddiness, the only one that you and I have much chance of doing anything about is our shoddy rhetorical theory and our shoddier teaching thereof. (10)
---
class: f23px
## Bad Advice
> Most of the rhetorical advice I find, even in texts that go beyond simple formulae for correctness, is entirely general. Be brief. Be clear. Be forceful. Revise carefully. Use short words. Such advice is not plainly wrong. It can even be useful. But since it is general, it gives me no help in deciding what arguments might appeal to you, sitting out there in all your particularity on a particular occasion. What appeals are available to me? What order should I give them? Brevity, clarity, unity, coherence, emphasis-none of these will be worth a brass farthing with you unless somehow I have managed to invent an organized chain of arguments about *this* subject for *this* audience that will bridge the gap between what you believed when you came and what I want you to believe when you depart. But you will look a long while in the available modern rhetorics before you will find much that could possibly help me in this central task. (11)
---
class: f36px
## Rhetoric Of Today

>  But it would be naive to think that reviving Aristotle or Quintilian or Campbell or Whately could solve our problems if we only studied them carefully. For one thing, the age of rhetoric has invented forms of persuasion that earlier ages knew not of. Much, perhaps most, of our rhetoric occurs in informal situations. (11)
---
class: f26px
## New Forms for a New World

> But this leads to a final reason for rejecting the notion that the revival of rhetoric can mean only the revival of earlier rhetorics. It is simply that none of them can possibly give us the comprehensive rhetorical theory we seek. Living in a new kind of rhetorical age, surrounded by, indeed practicing daily, forms of persuasion their authors never dreamed of, we inevitably hunger for a theory that will do justice to our manifold rhetorical experiences, and we do not find that the categories used by earlier theorists quite do the job. (11)
