---
title: 'ENGL 354 Crider & Anderson'
progress_bar: false
---
class: middle, center, bigger

# Jason Crider & Kenny Anderson, ["Disney Death Tour"](https://www.disneydeathtour.com/)
---
class: f24px
## Disney World as *Polis*
> Unlike other spaces of public gathering, individual “citizens” of these parks are barred access from the typical means of civic participation available in urban spaces, such as organizing protests or leaving memorials. Thus, if we are to construct a better polis, we must acknowledge the whole body: corporate, civic, living, dead. One of the many ways this tour makes its intervention is through examining the consequences that emerge as a result of the conflation of civic and corporate space assembled within Walt Disney World, and in turn offering a digital tool for intercalating memorial discourse into this space. Unlike paranoid conspiracy theories and academic critiques aimed at Disney’s aesthetic formations, Disney Death Tour is a rhetorical intervention that operates both as a critical webtext and as an embodied critique designed to be used within the space of the park. ("Welcome to the Tour")

---
class: f28px
## Myth
> “It’s company policy... [N]o one dies at Disney” (Inside the Mouse, 1995, p. 115). According to one of the most popular urban legends surrounding Walt Disney World, when a tourist with a heart condition goes lifeless on a roller coaster, medical professionals by decree must wait to make the death pronouncement off-property. Such a claim suggests corporate mediation so intrusive as to censor death itself. Whether we can verify the policy through documentary evidence remains to be seen. However, this “Disney death myth” characterizes power relations toward the Walt Disney Company and contributes to the mysterious ethos of the park. ("Introduction")

---
class: f25px
## Ambient Tourism
> Disney Death Tour identifies deaths at Walt Disney World in an attempt to restructure the polis of the park. As such, the goal is to provoke, but not to insult. In terms of ambient tourism, the goal is not to shame, but to engage with ambience so “as to (at least potentially) reattune or otherwise transform how others inhabit the world to an extent that calls for some action” (Rickert, p. 162). As a counter-narrative to Disney’s hypermediated spaces and muted depictions of death, the Death Tour provides a means of rumination on some of the invisible consequences of modern commercial tourism and entertainment. […] The aim is therefore not to ameliorate theme park fatalities-OSHA exists for that-but to enable civic discourses of death and memorial into widely shared community considerations of space ("Death Rhetoric")

---
class: f21px
## Tourist-Writer

> In one sense, this alternative mapping of Walt Disney World turns a smartphone into a can of spray paint, inscribing a corporate space with unsanctioned writings. Problematizing these rebellious assumptions, Barnett argued that “although attempting to unmask and demystify hidden power relations can satisfy in the short term, doing so also has the potential to leave in place the very thing we hoped to transcend-in this case the problem of yet another representation of space quietly asserting its own truth or authenticity.” Yes, Disney Death Tour attempts to demystify the corporate control of space at work in Walt Disney World, but rather than insisting on one interpretation of Disney (a reading), a focus on the writing-tourist shifts attention to what Barnett described as “those irreducible aspects of embodied being-in-the-world that haunt the accounts we offer of ourselves but that may never find a comfortable place in the discourses we rely upon to represent and memorialize those accounts.” Critical tourism is the participation in a contest for writing spaces through travel, and involves the embodied experience of existing in a *polis*. ("Death Rhetoric")

---
class: f20px
## Death at Disney

> That being said, there is one location at Walt Disney World that does portray death-the Haunted Mansion, the Orlando version of which opened in 1971. No deaths have been reported on the ride, but that has not negated its mythic depth. One ride operator explains that the ride shuts down several times a year to clean up ashes spread by park guests, presumably of loved ones who held a meaningful connection to the ride. When inquiring if the ashes are collected and stored somewhere, we were told that the process instead involves brooms and vacuums. While this is a rumor in the strictest sense, it would indicate that the playful irreverence of the attraction might bleed into the logic of yet another of Disney’s death procedures. […]
> 
> And perhaps this used to be the case. Memento Mori, the gift shop peripheral of the Haunted Mansion, once sold customizable death certificates, playful compositions that juxtaposed the living with the dead. While these are no longer available for purchase, the shop now offers “Spirit Photographs,” personalized 8x10" holographic portraits that, upon tilting, morph one’s face into that of a ghoul’s. ("Memento Moritmer")

---
