---
title: "ENGL 354 Foss & Griffin"
progress_bar: false
---
class: center, middle

# Sonja K. Foss & Cindy L. Griffin, “Beyond Persuasion: A Proposal for an Invitational Rhetoric”

---
class: f23px
## Patriarchal Bias

> As natural as an equation of rhetoric with persuasion seems for scholars of rhetoric, this conception is only one perspective on rhetoric and one, we suggest, with a patriarchal bias. (Foss & Griffin 2)

> Patriarchy is a political-social system that insists that males are inherently dominating, superior to everything and everyone deemed weak, especially females, and endowed with the right to dominate and rule over the weak and to maintain that dominance through various forms of psychological terrorism and violence.
>
> — bell hooks, *Understanding Patriarchy*, pg 1

> What makes it feminist is not its use by a particular population of rhetors but rather the grounding of its assumptions in feminist principles and theories. (Foss & Griffin 5)

---
class: f24px
## Definition

> Invitational rhetoric is an invitation to understanding as a means to create a relationship rooted in *equality*, *immanent value*, and *self-determiniation*. Invitational rhetoric constitutes an invitation to the audience to enter the rhetor's world and to see it as the rhetor does. In presenting a particular perspective, the invitational rhetor does not judge or denigrate others' perspectives but is open to and tries to appreciate and validate those perspectives, even if they differ dramatically from the rhetor's own. Ideally, audience members accept the invitation offered by the rhetor by listening to and trying to understand the rhetor's perspective and then presenting their own. When this happens, rhetor and audience alike contribute to the thinking about an issue so that everyone involved gains a greater understanding of the issue in its subtlety, richness, and complexity. (Foss & Griffin 5)

---
class: f34px

## Rhetoric is a Battlefield?

> Invitational rhetoric may serve as a way to allow these scholars to develop models for interaction not characterized by the opposition and competition that make the achievement of their goal difficult.

---
class: f29px
## Changing Change

> Change may be the result of invitational rhetoric, but change is not its purpose. When change does occur as a result of understanding, it is different from the kind of change that typifies the persuasive interactions of traditional rhetoric. In the traditional model, change is defined as a shift in the audience in the direction requested by the rhetor, who then has gained some measure of power and control over the audience. In invitational rhetoric, change occurs in the audience or rhetor or both as a result of new understanding and insights gained in the exchange of ideas. (Foss & Griffin 6)

---
class: f26px
## Safety and Systems

> The three external conditions of safety, value, and freedom required for others to present their perspectives were created by the speech. The rhetors communicated safety when they suggested that they regarded the perspective of the judges as legitimate one that they would treat with respect and care. (Foss & Griffin 13)

> Although invitational rhetoric is not designed to create a specific change, such as the transformation of system of oppression into ones that value and nurture individuals, it may produce such an outcome. Invitational rhetoric may resist an oppressive system simply because it models an alternative to the system ... (Foss & Griffin 16-17)