---
title: 'ENGL 354 Ratcliffe'
progress_bar: false
---
class: middle, center, bigger

# Krista Ratcliffe <br> "Rhetorical Listening"
---
class: f28px
## Ignore / Naturalize Listening

> But in the 20th century recovery of rhetoric within composition studies, reading and writing reign as the dominant tropes for interpretive invention;1 speaking places a respectable third; listening runs a poor, poor fourth. (195)

> But despite the work of these prominent scholars, the dominant trend in our field has been to follow the lead of popular culture and naturalize listening-to assume it is something that everyone does but no one need study. The implication for composition studies is quite simple: listening has almost ceased to be theorized or taught as a rhetorical strategy. (196)
---
class: f28px
## Learn By Doing?

> Classical theories foreground the rhetor's speaking and writing as means of persuading audiences; these theories are only secondarily concerned with how audiences should listen and hardly at all concerned with what Michelle Ballif calls the desires of particular audience members. Granted, Aristotle's *Rhetoric* assures students who study his rhetorical theory that they will learn not only how to produce enthymemes but also how to analyze them (I. 12), and in a culture whose texts were primarily oral, such analysis implies listening. But Aristotle's theory never delves into how to listen. Moreover, his production/reception linkage is more complicated than his assurance allows. (199)
---
class: f28px
## Divided *Logos*

> In general, the *logos* is a system of discourse within which a culture reasons and derives its truths. Although the Greeks had different concepts of *logos*, Heidegger argues that these concepts imply both speaking and listening. […] To explain his claim, Heidegger explores the relationship between the Greek noun *logos* and its verb form *legein*,which in its fullest sense means both "saying"and "laying"(198). The second meaning, "laying,"entails laying others' ideas in front of us in order to let these ideas lie before us. This laying-to-let-lie-before-us functions as a preservation of others' ideas and, hence, as a site for listening. (202)
---
class: f34px
## Saying vs Laying

> we inhabit a culture where "saying" has assumed dominance and "laying"(and, thus, listen- ing) has been displaced. Thus separated from a consideration of otherness, "saying"quickly becomes masterly expression; writing, a means of masterly expression; and reading, a means of mastering-the-masterly-expression. And all three quickly subsume listening. (202)

---
class: f24px
## Listening to a Text

> For just as all texts can be read, so too can all texts be listened to. As a trope for interpretive invention, rhetorical listening differs from reading in that it proceeds via different body organs, different disciplinary and cultural assumptions, and different figures of speech. […] For when listening within an undivided logos, we do not read simply for what we can agree with or challenge, as is the habit of academic reading (in its multiple guises). In- stead, we choose to listen also for the exiled excess and contemplate its relation to our culture and our selves. Such listening does not presume a naive, relativistic empathy,such as "I'm OK,You're OK," but rather an ethical responsibility to argue for what we deem fair and just while simultaneously questioning that which we deem fair and just. Such listening, I argue, may help us invent, interpret, and ultimately judge differently in that perhaps we can *hear* things we cannot *see*. (203)
---
class: f25px
## Listening with Agency

> I offer rhetorical listening as a trope for interpretive invention, one that emerges from a space within the logos where listeners may employ their agency […]  situate themselves openly in relation to all kinds of discourse, whether written, oral, or imagistic. The rhetorical listening that I am promoting is a performance that occurs when listeners invoke both their capacity and their willingness (1) to promote an understanding of self and other that informs our culture's politics and ethics, (2) to proceed from within a responsibility logic, not from within a defensive guilt/blame one, (3) to locate identification in discursive spaces of both commonalities and differences, and (4) to accentuate commonalities and differences not only in claims but in cultural logics within which those claims function. (204)
---
class: f21px
## Strategic Idealism

> I am advocating a strategic idealism when listening with the intent to understand. Strategic idealism implies a conscious identification among people that is based on a desire for an intersubjective receptivity, not mastery, and on a simultaneous recognition of similarities and differences, not merely one or the other. The idealism is strategic in that we should recognize the difficulty and dangers inherent in such a project... and proceed knowingly.
> 
> As I employ it, then,understanding means more than simply listening for a speaker/writer's intent. It also means more than simply listening for our own self-interested intent, which may range from appropriation (employing a text for one's own ends), to Burkean identification (smoothing over differences), to agreement (only affirming one's own view of reality). Instead, understanding means listening to discourse not for intent but with intent-with the intent to understand not just the claims, not just the cultural logics within which the claims function, but the rhetorical negotiations of understanding as well. (205)
---
class: f24px
## Personal to Political

> By focusing on the differences and commonalities within textual claims and their cultural logics, rhetorical listening ties the personal (the claim) to the political (the cultural logic) without totally collapsing differences be- tween the two. Although both claims and cultural logics are rhetorical constructs, our arguments and our analyses of arguments too often focus only on claims: "I'm right." vs. "No, you're not." If we recognize not just the claims but the historically-grounded cultural logics enveloping other people's claims, we may still disagree with the claims, but we may better understand the personal and cultural assumptions (dare I say, values and beliefs) that guide other people's logics. And if we also recognize how claims and cultural logics are rhetorically constructed, we may better appreciate the reasoning powers of others even when we disagree with them. (209)
---
class: f26px
## Why?

> It may be more another's truth than *the* truth that hurts us; however, this challenge, this conviction, this hurt exposes a space of dissonance. When responding to this dissonance, we should not accuse the person foregrounding it, deny its existence, nor bristle defensively. Such reactions only shut down dialogue and reinforce the status quo. Rather, we should question ourselves-our attitudes and our actions-to determine whether we need to affirm, revise, or reject them. If such questioning makes us more uncomfortable, so be it. In fact, good. Such discomfort simply signifies already existing problems and underscores the need for standing under the discourses of ourselves and others-and listening. (210)
---
class: f32px
## When To Do This?

> This young man reminded me of an important lesson: we learn by listening to those who do not agree with us, provided the listening occurs in the context of "genuine conversation" (Copeland), where there is a desire in all parties to move our understanding forward. If the context is not one of genuine conversation, then refusing to listen may be appropriate.The trick is recognizing the differences as well as the possibilities for transforming the latter into the former. (212)
