---
title: "ENGL 354 Fieri"
progress_bar: false
---
class: center, middle

# Pete Wells, "As Not Seen on TV" <br> & <br> "American Bar and Kitchen Menu"
---
class: f40px
## Questions?

> GUY FIERI, have you eaten at your new restaurant in Times Square? Have you pulled up one of the 500 seats at Guy’s American Kitchen & Bar and ordered a meal? Did you eat the food? Did it live up to your expectations?

---
class: f34px
## Descriptions?

> Did panic grip your soul as you stared into the [whirling hypno wheel of the menu](https://external-preview.redd.it/Xm38oYrH3bL903NziylJMUY2uv1Gn8ZdK64slgATxOI.jpg?auto=webp&s=2c1f6de98b3780adf80139a23d52c53a915aa90a), where adjectives and nouns spin in a crazy vortex? When you saw the burger described as “Guy’s Pat LaFrieda custom blend, all-natural Creekstone Farm Black Angus beef patty, LTOP (lettuce, tomato, onion + pickle), SMC (super-melty-cheese) and a slathering of Donkey Sauce on garlic-buttered brioche,” did your mind touch the void for a minute?

---
class: f40px
## Real New York?

> At your five Johnny Garlic’s restaurants in California, if servers arrive with main courses and find that the appetizers haven’t been cleared yet, do they try to find space for the new plates next to the dirty ones? Or does that just happen in Times Square, where people are used to crowding?

---
class: f29px
## Ethos?

> Has anyone ever told you that your high-wattage passion for no-collar American food makes you television’s answer to Calvin Trillin, if Mr. Trillin bleached his hair, drove a Camaro and drank Boozy Creamsicles? When you cruise around the country for your show “Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives,” rasping out slangy odes to the unfancy places where Americans like to get down and greasy, do you really mean it?
>
> Or is it all an act? Is that why the kind of cooking you celebrate on television is treated with so little respect at Guy’s American Kitchen & Bar?
---
class: f33px
## Authenticity?

> How, for example, did Rhode Island’s supremely unhealthy and awesomely good fried calamari — dressed with garlic butter and pickled hot peppers — end up in your restaurant as a plate of pale, unsalted squid rings next to a dish of sweet mayonnaise with a distant rumor of spice?
> 
> How did Louisiana’s blackened, Cajun-spiced treatment turn into the ghostly nubs of unblackened, unspiced white meat in your Cajun Chicken Alfredo?

---
class: f42px
## Taste?

> When you hung that sign by the entrance that says, WELCOME TO FLAVOR TOWN!, were you just messing with our heads?
>
> Does this make it sound as if everything at Guy’s American Kitchen & Bar is inedible? I didn’t say that, did I?

---
class: f42px
## Real Culture?

> Is the entire restaurant a very expensive piece of conceptual art? Is the shapeless, structureless baked alaska that droops and slumps and collapses while you eat it, or don’t eat it, supposed to be a representation in sugar and eggs of the experience of going insane?