---
title: ENGL 353 Plato, Gorgias II
progress_bar: false
---

class: middle, bigger

.center[
# Plato, *Gorgias*
]
---
class: f25px
## Assignment #1

We have read three Socratic dialogs. In these Socrates debates some question pertinent to the nature of reality with a variety of interlocutors. Given that this form of debate is central to the Western conception of rhetoric, what might Socrates ask after today? Do you think questions of what is good or just still things we would debate? Or would Socrates be more concrete? Would the medium for dialog change?

For this assignment, write a 2-3 page essay explaining what you think a Socratic dialog might look like today in terms of both form and content. Cite evidence from the dialogs we have read to support your claims and bear in mind the characteristics of the dialogs we have discussed. Then produce a sample of this dialog (written or otherwise) that should run to about 4-5 pages of “text.”

---
class: f31px
## Dialogue Features

1. Concerned with a central issue (opinion vs. truth; justice vs. rhetoric, etc)
1. Can touch on multiple topics
1. Generally works by assertion and refutation
	1. "Do you think X works like this?"
	1. "No, X works in a different manner: here it is."
	1. "Given that you believe that, do you also believe Y, which follows logically?"
1. Comments on present society as well as Truth
1. Characters are often real (though composites)
1. Usually features Socrates and those that don't have a wise person of some sort
---
class: f21px
## Discussion Leader (Daniel)

> CALLICLES: ...No, no man would put up with suffering what's unjust; only a slave would do so, one who is better dead than alive, who when he's treated unjustly and abused can't protect himself or anyone else he cares about. I believe that the people who institute our laws are the weak and the many. They do this, and they assign praise and blame with themselves and their own advantage in mind. They're afraid of the more powerful among men, the ones who are capable of having a greater share, and so they say that getting more than one's share is "shameful" and "unjust," and that doing what's unjust is trying to get more of one's share. They do this so that people won't get a greater share than they. I think they like getting an equal share, since they are inferior. (483b-c)

Regarding Socrates view of better to suffer what's unjust than to commit what's unjust, is this statement true today? Have our leaders written laws to protect the weak from the strong, because they are weak? Looking at our own society, does an American capitalistic free-market allow for the strong to take more than their fair share? Or, are there laws that prevent just that?
---
class: f26px
## Discussion Leader (Mercedes)

> SOCRATES: So its’s necessarily very much the case, Callicles, that the self-controlled man, because he’s just and brave and pious, as we’ve recounted, is a completely good man, that the good man does well and admirably whatever he does, and that the good man does well is blessed and happy, while the corrupt man, the one who does badly is miserable….So this is how I set down the matter, and I say that this is true. And if it is true, then a person who wants to be happy must evidently pursue and practice self-control. (507c-d)

Would you agree that the happy man is the virtuous and moderate? Does there does exist a standard for authentic happiness, or that it is completely relative?

---
class: no-margin, two-column, f22px
## Knack

> POLUS: Tell me, Socrates, since you think Gorgias is confused about oratory, what do you say it is?
> 
> SOCRATES: Are you asking me what craft I say it is?
> 
> POLUS: Yes, I am.
> 
> SOCRATES: To tell you the truth, Polus, I don’t think it’s a craft at all.
> 
> POLUS: Well then, what do you think oratory is?
> 
> SOCRATES: In the treatise that I read recently, it’s the thing that you say has produced craft.
> 
> POLUS: What do you mean?
> 
> SOCRATES: I mean a knack.
> 
> POLUS: So you think oratory’s a knack?
> 
> SOCRATES: Yes, I do, unless you say it’s something else.
> 
> POLUS: A knack for what?
> 
> SOCRATES: For producing a certain gratification and pleasure. (462b-c)

---
class: no-margin, two-column, f22px
## Pastry Baking?

> SOCRATES: Ask me now what craft I think pastry baking is.
> 
> POLUS: All right, I will. What craft is pastry baking?
> 
> SOCRATES: It isn’t one at all, Polus. Now say, “What is it then?”
> 
> POLUS: All right.
> 
> SOCRATES: It’s a knack. Say, “A knack for what?”
> 
> POLUS: All right.
> 
> SOCRATES: For producing gratification and pleasure, Polus.
> 
> POLUS: So oratory is the same thing as pastry baking?
> 
> SOCRATES: Oh no, not at all, although it is a part of the same practice.
> 
> POLUS: What practice do you mean?
> 
> SOCRATES: … I call it flattery, basically … This part *seems* to be acraft, but in my account of it it isn't a craft but a knack and a routine. I call oratory [and pastry-baking] a part of this, too, along with cosmetics and sophistry. (462d-463b)

---
class: f25px
## Callicles's Rhetoric of Self-Empowerment

> No, no man would put up with suffering what's unjust; only a slave would do so, one who is better dead than alive, who when he's treated unjustly and abused can't protect himself or anyone else he cares about. I believe that the people who institute our laws are the weak and the many. They do this, and they assign praise and blame with themselves and their own advantage in mind. They're afraid of the more powerful among men, the ones who are capable of having a greater share, and so they say that getting more than one's share is "shameful" and "unjust," and that doing what's unjust is trying to get more than one's share. They do this so that those people won't get a greater share than they. I think they like getting an equal share, since they are inferior. (483b-c)
---
class: f26px, no-margin
## Ruling Themselves

> SOCRATES: But what of themselves, my friend?
>
> CALLICLES: What of *what*?
>
> SOCRATES: Ruling or being ruled?
>
> CALLICLES: What do you mean?
>
> SOCRATES: I mean each individual ruling himself. Or is there no need at all to rule himself, but only to rule others?
>
> CALLICLES: What do you mean, rule himself?
>
> SOCRATES: Nothing very subtle. Just what the many mean: being self-controlled and master of oneself, ruling the pleasures and the appetites within oneself. (491d-e)
---
class: f34px
## Knack for Tradition

> SOCRATES: The other, the one concerned with pleasure, to which the whole of its service is entirely devoted, proceeds toward its object quite inexpertly, without having at all considered either the nature of pleasure or its cause. It does so completely irrationally, with virtually no discrimination. Through routine and knack it merely preserves the memory of what customarily happens, and that's how it also supplies its pleasures. (501a-b)
---
class: f34px
## Justice and the Soul

> SOCRATES: So this is what that skilled and good orator will look to when he applies as all of his actions, and any gift he makes or any confiscation he carries out. He will always give his attention to how justice may come to exist in the souls of his fellow citizens and injustice be gotten rid of, how self-control may come to exist there and lack of discipline be gotten rid of, and how the rest of excellence may come into being there and evil may depart. (505d-e)
---
class: f30px
## Talking To Himself

> SOCRATES: Listen, then, as I pick up the discussion from the beginning. Is the pleasant the same as the good?—It isn't as Callicles and I have agreed.—Is the pleasant to be done for the sake of the good, or the good for the sake of the pleasant?—The pleasant for the sake of the good.—And *pleasant* is that by which, when it's come to be present in us, we feel pleasure, and good that by which, when it's present in us, we feel pleasure, and good that by which, when some excellence has come to be present in us?—Yes, I do think that's necessarily so, Callicles?... (506c-d)
---
class: f32px
## Live Beyond Yourself

> SOCRATES: But, my blessed man, please see whether what's noble and what's good isn't something other than preserving and being preserved. Perhaps one who is truly a man should stop thinking about how long he will live. He should not be attached to life but should commit these concerns to the god and believe the women who say that not one single person can escape fate. He should thereupon give consideration to how he might live the part of his life still before him as well as possible. (512d-e)
---
class: f23px
## The Orator Takes On the Character of the City

> SOCRATES: For each group of people take delight in speeches that are given in its own character, and resents those given in an alien manner. (513b)
---
class: f23px
## The Orator Takes On the Character of the City

> SOCRATES: For each group of people take delight in speeches that are given in its own character, and resents those given in an alien manner. (513b)

> SOCRATES: You sing the praises of those who threw parties for these people, and who feasted them lavishly with what they had an appetite for. And they say that *they* have made the city great! But that the city is swollen and festering, thanks to those early leaders, that they don't notice. For they filled the city with harbors and dockyards, walls, and tribute payments and such trash as that, but did so without justice and self-control. So, when that fit of sickness comes on, they'll blame their advisers of the moment and sing the praises of Themistocles and Cimon and Pericles, if you're not careful, they'll lay their hands on you ... when they lose not only what they gained but what they had original as well (518e-519a)

---
class: f25px
## The Ending

> SOCRATES: So, listen to me and follow me to where I am, and when you've come here you'll be happy both during life and at its end, as the account indicates. Let someone despise you as a fool and throw dirt on you, if he likes. And, yes, by Zeus, confidently let him deal you that demeaning blow. Nothing terrible will to you if you really are an admirable and good man, one who practices excellence. And then, after we've practiced it then at last, if we think we should, we'll turn to politics, or then we'll deliberate about whatever subject we please, when we're better at deliberating than we are now. For it's a shameful thing for us, being in the condition we appear to be in at present—when we never think the same about the same subjects, the most important ones at that—to sound off as though we're somebodies. That's how far behind in education we've fallen. (527c-e)
