---
title: ENGL 353 Quintilian
progress_bar: false
---
class: center, middle
# Quintilian <br> *Institutes of Oratory*
---
class: f20px
## The Place of Rhetoric

> The rhetoricians think it their business merely to declaim and to teach the art and practice of declaiming, confining themselves, too, to deliberative and judicial subjects (for others they despise as beneath their profession), while the grammarians, on their part, do not deem it sufficient to have taken what has been left them (on which account also gratitude should be accorded them), but encroach even upon *prosopopeiae* and suasory speeches, in which even the very greatest efforts of eloquence are displayed. 3. Hence, accordingly, it has happened that what was the first business of the one art has become the last of the other and that boys of an age to be employed in higher departments of study remain sunk in the lower school and practise rhetoric under the grammarian. Thus, what is eminently ridiculous, a youth seems unfit to be sent to a teacher of declamation until he already knows how to declaim.
> 
> Let us assign each of these professions its due limits. Let grammar (which, turning it into a Latin word, they have called *literatura*, "literature") know its own boundaries, especially as it is so far advanced beyond the humility indicated by its name, to which humility the early grammarians restricted themselves. (II.i.2-4)

---
class: f29px
## Progymnasmata (II.iv)

1. Fable
1. Narrative
1. Chreia (Maxim)
1. Proverb
1. Refutation
1. Confirmation
1. Commonplace
1. Encomium
1. Vituperation
1. Comparison
1. Impersonation
1. Description
1. Thesis or Theme
1. Defend / Attack a Law
---
class: f34px
## Don't Neglect the Basics

> But this very point depends upon the preceding subject of consideration, for if the office of the grammarian is extended even to suasory speeches, the necessity for the rhetorician will come later. If the rhetorician, however, does not shrink from the earliest duties of his profession, his attention is required even from the time when the pupil begins narrations and produces his little exercises in praising and blaming. (II.i.8)
---
class: f25px
## Advice to Parents

> NOR is the opinion of those to be passed in silence who, even when they think boys fit for the professor of rhetoric, imagine that he is not at once to be consigned to the most eminent, but detain him for some time under inferior teachers with the notion that moderate ability in a master is not only better adapted for beginning instruction in art, but easier for comprehension and imitation, as well as less disdainful of undertaking the trouble of the elements. On this head I think no long labor necessary to show how much better it is to be imbued with the best instructions and how much difficulty is attendant on eradicating faults which have once gained ground, as double duty falls on succeeding masters, and the task indeed of unteaching is heavier and more important than that of teaching at first. (II.iii.1-2)
---
class: f25px
## Obscurity & Style

>  What shall be said, too, if it generally happens that instructions given by the most learned are far more easy to be understood and more perspicuous than those of others? For perspicuity is the chief virtue of eloquence, and the less ability a man has, the more he tries to raise and swell himself out, as those of short stature exalt themselves on tip-toe, and the weak use most threats. As to those whose style is inflated, displaying a vitiated taste, and who are fond of sounding words, or faulty from any other mode of vicious affectation, I am convinced that they labor under the fault not of strength, but of weakness, as bodies are swollen not with health, but with disease, and as men who have erred from the straight road generally make stoppages. Accordingly, the less able a teacher is, the more obscure will he be. (II.iii.8-9)
---
class: f28px
## Florid Style, Tempered Orator

> Above all, therefore, and especially for boys, a dry master is to be avoided no less than a dry soil, void of all moisture, for plants that are still tender. Under the influence of such a tutor, they at once become dwarfish, looking as it were towards the ground, and daring to aspire to nothing above everyday talk. To them, leanness is in place of health and weakness instead of judgment; and while they think it sufficient to be free from fault, they fall into the fault of being free from all merit. Let not even maturity itself, therefore, come too fast; let not the must, while yet in the vat, become mellow, for so it will bear years and be improved by age. (II.iv.8-9)
---
class: f26px
## Bad Examples

> Nor is it without advantage, indeed, that inelegant and faulty speeches, yet such as many, from depravity of taste, would admire, should be read before boys and that it should be shown how many expressions in them are inappropriate, obscure, tumid, low, mean, affected, or effeminate; expressions which, however, are not only extolled by many readers, but what is worse, are extolled for the very reason that they are vicious, for straight-forward language, naturally expressed, seems to some of us to have nothing of genius; but whatever departs, in any way, from the common course, we admire as something exquisite, as with some persons, more regard is shown for figures that are distorted and in any respect monstrous than for such as have lost none of the advantages of ordinary conformation. (II.v.10-11)
---
class: f22px
## Teachers as Intellectual Parents

> HAVING spoken thus fully concerning the duties of teachers, I give pupils, for the present, only this one admonition: that they are to love their tutors not less than their studies and to regard them as parents, not indeed of their bodies, but of their minds. Such affection contributes greatly to improvement, for pupils under its influence will not only listen with pleasure, but will believe what is taught them and will desire to resemble their instructors. They will come together in assembling for school, with pleasure and cheerfulness; they will not be angry when corrected and will be delighted when praised; and they will strive, by their devotion to study, to become as dear as possible to the master. For as it is the duty of preceptors to teach, so it is that of pupils to show themselves teachable; neither of these duties, else, will be of avail without the other. And as the generation of man is effected by both parents, and as you will in vain scatter seed unless the furrowed ground, previously softened, cherish it so, neither can eloquence come to its growth unless by mutual agreement between him who communicates and him who receives. (II.ix.1-3)
---
class: f25px
## Why Cultivate Style?

> I MUST not forbear to acknowledge, however, that people in general adopt the notion that the unlearned appear to speak with more force than the learned. But this opinion has its origin chiefly in the mistake of those who judge erroneously and who think that what has no art has the more energy, just as if they should conceive it a greater proof of strength to break through a door than to open it, to rupture a knot than to untie it, to drag an animal than to lead it. By such persons a gladiator, who rushes to battle without any knowledge of arms, and a wrestler, who struggles with the whole force of his body to effect that which he has once attempted, is called so much the braver, though the latter is often laid prostrate by his own strength, and the other, however violent his assault, is withstood by a gentle turn of his adversary's wrist. (II.xii.1-2)
---
class: f35px
## Rhetoric: More Than Just Rules

> for rhetoric would be a very easy and small matter if it could be included in one short body of rules, but rules must generally be altered to suit the nature of each individual case, the time, the occasion, and necessity itself; consequently, one great quality in an orator is discretion, because he must turn his thoughts in various directions according to the different bearings of his subject. (II.xiii.2)
---
class: f21px
## Translation

> SOME who have translated ῥητορικὴ (*rhētorikē*) from Greek into Latin have called it *ars oratoria* and *oratrix*. I would not deprive those writers of their due praise for endeavoring to add to the copiousness of the Latin language, but all Greek words do not obey our will in attempting to render them from the Greek, as all our words, in like manner, do not obey that of the Greeks when they try to express something of ours in their own tongue. This translation is no less harsh than the *essentia* and *entia* of Flavius, for the Greek οὐσία (*onsia*): nor is it indeed exact, for oratoria will be taken in the same sense as *elocutoria*, *oratrix* as *elocutrix*, but the word *rhētorikē*, of which we are speaking, is the same sort of word as *eloquentia*, and it is doubtless used in two senses by the Greeks. In one acceptation, it is an adjective, *ars rhetorica*, as *navis* *piratica*: in the other a substantive, like *philosophia* or *amicitia*. We wish it now to have the signification of a substantive, just as γραμματικὴ (grammatikē) is rendered by the substantive literatura, not by *literatrix*, which would be similar to *oratrix*, nor by *literatoria*, which would be similar to *oratoria*; but for the word *rhētorikē*, no equivalent Latin word has heen found. (II.xiv.1-3)
---
class: f27px
## Rhetoric: Three Meanings

>  Rhetoric, then, (for we shall henceforth use this term without dread of sarcastic objections) will be best divided, in my opinion, in such a manner that we may speak first of the art, next of the artist, and then of the work. The art will be that which ought to be attained by study and is the knowledge how to speak well. The artificer is he who has thoroughly acquired the art, that is, the orator, whose business is to speak well. The work is what is achieved by the artificer, that is, good speaking. All these are to be considered under special heads, but of the particulars that are to follow, I shall speak in their several places; at present I shall proceed to consider what is to be said on the first general head. (II.xiv.5)
---
class: f26px
## Limits of a Copy (Simulacrum)

> Moreover, everything that resembles something else must necessarily be inferior to that of which it is a copy, as the shadow to the substance, the portrait to the natural face, and the player's acting to the real feeling. The same is the case with regard to oratorical composition, for in the originals we take for our models there is nature and real power, while every imitation, on the contrary, is something counterfeit and seems adapted to an object not its own. (X.ii.11)

> Nor let those who have sufficient judgment for avoiding faults, be satisfied with forming a semblance, a mere cuticle of excellence, if I may so express myself, or rather one of those images of Epicurus, which he says are perpetually flying off from the surfaces of bodies. (X.ii.15)
---
class: f23px
## Store of Examples (Jump Ahead)

> Above all things, an orator should be furnished with an ample store of examples, both ancient as well as modern, since he should not only be acquainted with matters which are recorded in history, or transmitted from hand to hand, as it were, by tradition or are of daily occurrence, but should not even be neglectful of the fictions of the more eminent poets. For those of the former kind have the authority of testimonies or even of precedents, and the latter sort are either supported by the sanction of antiquity or are supposed to have been invented by great men to serve as precepts. 2. Let the orator, therefore, know as many as possible of every kind, for hence it is that greater authority is attributed to old men, as they are thought to have known and seen more than others, a fact to which Homer frequently attests. But we must not wait till the last stage of life to acquire authority, for study affords us such advantage that, as far as knowledge of events is concerned, we seem even to have lived in past ages. (XII.iv.1-2)

---
class: f22px
## Slowness and Writing

> From my disapprobation of carelessness in writing, it is clearly enough seen what I think of the fine fancy of dictation, for in the use of the pen, the hand of the writer, however rapid, as it cannot keep pace with the celerity of his thoughts, allows them some respite. But he to whom we dictate urges us on, and we feel ashamed at times to hesitate, or stop, or alter, as if we were afraid to have a witness of our weakness. Hence it happens that not only inelegant and casual expressions, but sometimes unsuitable ones, escape us, because our sole anxiety is to make our discourse connected. (X.iii.9-10)

> Some lesser matters also (though nothing is little that relates to study) must not be left unnoticed, one of which is that we can write best on waxen tablets from which there is the greatest facility for erasing, unless, perchance, weakness of sight requires the use of parchment. Though it assists the sight, parchment causes delay and interrupts the current of thought from the frequent movement of the hand, backwards and forwards, while dipping the pen in the ink. (X.iii.31)
---
class: f21px
## Meditation & Writing

> NEXT to writing is *meditation*, which indeed derives strength from it and is something between the labor of writing and the trial of our fortune in extemporary speaking. I do not know whether it is more frequently used than either, for we cannot write everywhere and at all times, but there is abundance of time and room for thought. Meditation may in a very few hours embrace all points of the most important causes. When our sleep is broken at night, meditation is aided by the very darkness. Between the different stages in the pleading of a cause, it finds some room to exercise itself and never allows itself to be idle. Nor does it only arrange within its circle the order of things (which would itself be a great assistance to us), but forms an array of words and connects together the whole texture of speech, with such effect that nothing is wanting but to write it down. Indeed, in general, ideas are more firmly fixed in the memory if our attention does not relax its hold on them by trusting too securely to writing.
>
> But we cannot arrive at such power of thought suddenly or even soon. (X.vi.1-2)
---
class: f36px
## Famous Definition

> LET the orator whom I propose to form, then, be such a one as is characterized by the definition of Marcus Cato, **a good man skilled in speaking**. (XII.i.1)

Often rendered: "a good man speaking well"
---
class: f38px
## Famous Statements About Rhetoric (so far)

1. Rhetoric is "the faculty of observing in any given case the available means of persuasion" (Aristotle)
1. The Orator is "a good man speaking well" (Quintilian)

---
class: f26px
## Explanation

> But the requisite which Cato has placed first in this definition—that an orator should be a good man—is naturally of more estimation and importance than the other. It is important that an orator should be good because, should the power of speaking be a support to evil, nothing would be more pernicious than eloquence alike to public concerns and private. I myself, who, as far as is in my power, strive to contribute something to the faculty of the orator, should deserve very ill of the world, since I should furnish arms, not for soldiers, but for robbers. (XII.i.1)
---
class: f23px
## Why So Much Eloquence?

> But I fancy that I hear some (for there will never be wanting men who would rather be eloquent than good) saying "Why then is there so much art devoted to eloquence? Why have you given precepts on rhetorical coloring and the defense of difficult causes, and some even on the acknowledgment of guilt, unless, at times, the force and ingenuity of eloquence overpowers even truth itself? For a good man advocates only good causes, and truth itself supports them sufficiently without the aid of learning." These objectors I shall endeavor to satisfy by answering them, first, concerning my own work, and, secondly, concerning the duty of a good man if occasion ever calls him to the defense of the guilty.
>
> To consider how we may speak in defense of what is false, or even what is unjust, is not without its use, if for no other reason than we may expose and refute fallacious arguments with the greater ease. (XII.i.33-34)
---
class: f23px
## Cradle to Grave

> AFTER displaying these excellences of eloquence on trials, in councils, at the assemblies of the people, in the senate, and in every province of a good citizen, the orator will think of bringing his labors to an end worthy of an honorable man and a noble employment, not because it is ever time to leave off doing good or because it is improper for one endowed with such understanding and talents to spend the longest possible time in so dignified an occupation, but because it becomes him to take care that he may not speak worse than he has been in the habit of speaking. The orator does not depend merely on knowledge, which increases with years, but on strength of voice, lungs, and constitution, and if these are weakened or impaired by age or ill health, he must beware lest something of his usual excellence is missed, lest he should be obliged to stop from fatigue, lest he should perceive that what he says is imperfectly heard, and lest he should not recognize his former in his present self. (XII.xi.1-2)
---
class: f25px
## Final Thoughts

> Let us then pursue, with our whole powers, the true dignity of eloquence, nothing better than which has been given to mankind by the immortal gods. Without it, all nature would be mute and all our acts would be deprived alike of present honor and of commemoration among posterity. Therefore, let us aspire to the highest excellence, for by this means, we shall either attain the summit or at least see many below us.
>
> Such are the observations, Marcellus Victor, from which I thought the art of oratory might, as far as was in my power, derive some assistance from me. Attention to what I have said, if it does not bring great advantage to studious youth, will at least excite in them what I desire even more—a love for doing well. (XII.xi.31-32)
