---
title: ENGL 353 Erasmus VII
progress_bar: true
---
class: center, middle

.title-block[
# Desiderius Erasmus

## Assembling Illustrative Materials
]
---
class: f29px
## Getting Organized

> Having made up your mind to cover the whole field of literature in your reading (and anyone who wishes to be thought educated must do this at least once in his life), first provide yourself with a full list of subjects. These will consist partly of the main types and subdivisions of vice and virtue, partly of the things of most prominence in human affairs which frequently occur when we have a case to put forward, and they should be arranged according to similars and opposites. Related topics naturally suggest what comes next in the list, and one remembers opposites in the same way. (II. Assembling Illustrative Material)
---
class: f21px
## Example Topic

> Suppose for the sake of example that the first heading is 'Reverence and Irreverence.' To these will be subjoined the related subordinate types. Under 'Reverence' we shall have different sorts of proper feeling: reverence towards God, patriotism towards one's country, love for children, respect for parents or for those whom one should honour as parents, such as teachers and those whose generosity has preserved us. The opposite of this is Irreverence, and related to both is 'Superstition, so that should be added here. A wide field now opens up covering outlandish forms of worship, and the different rites of various peoples, also the foolish indulgence of parents towards children, which is a misdirected love for the child. […]
>
> These topics can be developed through all the standard treatments: what reverence is, how it differs from other virtues, what is its particular characteristic, by what activities it is demonstrated or violated, what nourishes or destroys it, what advantages it brings to man. Here a whole field of illustrative examples and judgments opens up. (II. Assembling Illustrative Material)
---
class: f25px
## Examples & Commonplaces I

> Topics that do not come under the head of vices and virtues belong partly to 'examples', partly to 'commonplaces'. The first group covers things like: remarkable longevity, vigorous old age, old head on young shoulders, remarkable happiness, remarkable memory, sudden change of fortune, sudden death, self-inflicted death, horrible death, monstrous births, remarkable eloquence, remarkable wealth, famous men of humble birth, cunning, remarkable physical strength, remarkable beauty, outstanding mind in ugly body, and so on. To each of these heads should be attached their opposites and things associated with them: remarkable eloquence has as its opposite remarkable inarticulateness, and associated with it sweetness of voice, grace of movement, histrionic ability, and so on. (II. Assembling Illustrative Material)
---
class: f22px
## Examples & Commonplaces II

> 'Commonplaces' covers things like: It is very important what interests you develop as a boy; It matters what company you keep; His own is fair in each man's eyes; Offence is easy, reconciliation hard; The safest course is to believe no one; Love as one soon to hate, hate as one soon to love; He gives twice who gives readily; Each man manufactures his own fortune; The wrath of kings moves slowly; The friendship of princes is perilous: War is pleasant to those who have not experienced it; A shared kingdom is insecure; The best provision for old age is learning. But what is the point of going on quoting these when there are thousands of them? One must choose from them the ones that seem most suited to speeches.
>
> 'Commonplaces' also includes stock comparisons like: Is the married or unmarried state happier? private or public life? Is monarchy preferable to democracy? Is the life of the student better than that of the uneducated? (II. Assembling Illustrative Material)

---
class: f22px
## Reading for Abundance

> So prepare for yourself a sufficient number of headings, and arrange them as you please, subdivide them into the appropriate sections, and under each section add your commonplaces and maxims; and then whatever you come across in any author, particularly if it is rather striking, you will be able to note down immediately in the proper place, be it an anecdote or a fable or an illustrative example or a strange incident or a maxim or a witty remark or a remark notable for some other quality or a proverb or a metaphor or a simile.
>
> This has the double advantage of fixing what you have read more firmly in your mind, and getting you into the habit of using the riches supplied by your reading. Some people have much material stored up so to speak in their vaults, but when it comes to speaking or writing they are remarkably ill-supplied or impoverished. A third result is that whatever the occasion demands, you will have the materials for a speech ready to hand, as you have all the pigeonholes duly arranged so that you can extract just what you want from them. (II. Assembling Materials)
---
class: f38px

## Bees

> So our student will flit like a busy bee through the entire garden of literature, will light on every blossom, collect a little nectar from each, and carry it to his hive. Since there is such an abundance of material that one cannot gather everything, he will at least take the most striking and fit this into his scheme of work. (II. Assembling Materials)
---
class: f20px
## [Method of Loci](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Method_of_loci)
> One can even twist material to serve the opposite purpose. If you were praising a man for all Seasons, endowed with a versatile and dexterous mind, you could dip into your inconstancy' cupboard and bring out the polyp which changes colour according to the surface beneath it, and then the Euripus, saying that this sea is not so versatile as this man's mind. You could bring out the flame which cannot stand still, the sky which constantly presents a different face, the reed bending according as the breezes blow, and say that it is the mark of a wise man to change his views and his way of life according to events, circumstances, places. Only senseless rocks and the brute earth do not move. Of living creatures, those that are most impressive are the most mobile. In the universe things are nobler the further they are from immobility: earth which does not move is the lowest, then comes water which does move, then air which moves more, then fire which moves even more than air, and finally the heaven which moves most of all. This is why the ancients called the mind of man wind and fire, but the stupid, slow, and foolish they called stones and lead, things to which the word "immovability' is particularly applicable. (II. Assembling Illustrative Material)
---
class: f22px

## Method of Loci in Rhetoric

> In order to form a series of places in memory, he says, a building is to be remembered, as spacious and varied a one as possible, the fore-court, the living room, bedrooms, and parlours, not omitting statues and other ornaments with which the rooms are decorated. The images by which the speech is to be remembered—as an example of these Quintilian says one may use an anchor or a weapon—are then placed in imagination on the places which have been memorised in the building. This done, as soon as the memory of the facts requires to be revived, all these places are visited in turn and the various deposits demanded of their custodians. We have to think of the ancient orator as moving in imagination through his memory building whilst he is making his speech, draw-ing from the memorised places the images he has placed on them. The method ensures that the points are remembered in the right order, since the order is fixed by the sequence of places in the building.
>
> – Frances Yates, *The Art of Memory*
