---
title: ENGL 353 Erasmus II
progress_bar: false
---
class: center, middle

# Desiderius Erasmus, From *De Copia*
---
class: f28px
## Discussion Question (Angela)

> Fables are very similar to legendary, except that fables are more immediately attractive and make the point more effectively. Their attraction is due to their witty imitation of the way people behave, and the hearers give their assent because the truth is set out vividly before their very eyes. Fables are particularly effective with uneducated and unsophisticated people, and anyone else whose ways still have a whiff of the days of yore.
 
What do you think about Erasmus's use of "uneducated and unsophisticated"? What qualities of a fable might Erasmus disagree with? Are there situations in which being succinct may be more effective than being abundant?

---
## Discussion Question (Sydney)

> “Just as one can recognize the trained athlete or musician even when he is not concentrating particularly, so one can perceive the true orator anywhere in the speech by the way details of this sort are aptly added to the mixture in the appropriate place” (lines 5-8; p. 592) 

Before this quote, Erasmus describes Method 5, which  explains how vividness increases credibility by utilizing a “show not tell” approach. He states “for the sake of amplifying or decorating our passage, or giving pleasure to our readers” one must create a vivid scene, so that the audience feels like they are in a theatre (lines 9-10; p. 577).
 
By comparing an orator to a trained athlete or musician performing freely, Erasmus reiterates Castiglione’s idea of sprezzatura, or appearing nonchalant. Do you think that vividness can appear nonchalant? If so, how does kairos play a role in vividness? Or more specifically, what situations do you think one should be appropriately descriptive? Do you think there are situations where being vivid is not appropriate or necessary? 
---
class: f23px
## Assignment #2

For this assignment, imagine a copia that might be needed today. What situations require a variety of spontaneous, eloquent responses? How else might a person appear eloquent? Compose a copia and then complete the exercise with 100 or so variations on the form.

### Document Elements

* **Introduction**—1-2 paragraphs explaining the value of your copia or the use of it or situations in which one might need an abundant style.
* **Description**—As with the beginning of the Book XXXIII in De Copia, break down each term in your *copia*, explaining how the user might expand each term.
* **Examples**—Provide ~100 examples of the expansion of your copia. Remember that you can vary the sentence structure as well as the words themselves.

---
class: f26px
## Why Do This?

> The first method on enriching what one has to say on a subject is to take something that can be expressed in brief and general terms, and expand it and separate it into its constituent parts. This is just like displaying some object for sale first of all through a grill or inside a wrapping, and then unwrapping it and opening it out and displaying it fully to the gaze.
>
> Here is an example of the method. Let us take the sentence: *He wasted all his substance in riotous living*. This is expressed in summary fashion, and is, so to speak, wrapped up. We can open it up by enumerating all the different types of possessions and setting out the various ways of wasting them: ... (II. Method 1)
---
class: f38px
## Expansion

> Here I would make what I think is a helpful suggestion: have the general statement set out right at the beginning, and then take it up again in a different form of words, returning to the basic idea as if you have wearied of enumerating details, even if in fact nothing has been omitted. (II. Method 1)

---
class: f31px
## Variety of Variety

> It is not enough to provide oneself with an enormous and very varied supply of illustrations, and to have them ready for use at a moment's notice; one must also be able to handle them with variety. Variety can be provided by the very nature of the illustrative examples themselves. They can be things done or said in the past, or be derived from the customs of various nations. There will be differences according to whether they are drawn from historians, or from poets ..., or from philosophers..., or from the theologians, or the books of the Bible ... (II. Method 11)
---
class: f28px
## Reading

> Having made up your mind to cover the whole field of literature in your reading (**and anyone who wishes to be educated must do this at least once in his life**), first provide yourself with a full list of subjects. These will consist partly of the main types and subdivisions of vice and virtue, partly of the things of most prominence in human affairs which frequently occur when we have a case to put forward, and they should be arranged according to similars and opposites ...
>
> Topics that do not come under the head of vices and virtues belong partly to "examples," partly to "commonplaces"  (II. Assembling Materials)
---
class: f23px
## Commonplaces

> Generally speaking, arguments are derived from definition or defining formulae, from description, from exposition of the meaning of a word, which is a form of definition, or from things which definition by its very nature includes: genus, species, properties, differentiating characteristics, subdivision, classification (this last takes various forms, for example, a consideration of aspects such as commencement, completion, development); or from deductions based on similar or dissimilar situations; from contraries, contradictions, consequences, related propositions, causes, results, comparisons ... and from self-evident statements ... Anyone training with a view to acquiring eloquence will have to look at all the possible topics in turn, go knocking from door to door so to speak, to see if anything can be induced to emerge; but with practice the right ones will come to suggest themselves naturally, without this process being necessary. (II. Method 11)
---
class: f22px
## Reading for Abundance

> So prepare for yourself a sufficient number of headings, and arrange them as you please, subdivide them into the appropriate sections, and under each section add your commonplaces and maxims; and then whatever you come across in any author, particularly if it is rather striking, you will be able to note down immediately in the proper place, be it an anecdote or a fable or an illustrative example or a strange incident or a maxim or a witty remark or a remark notable for some other quality or a proverb or a metaphor or a simile.
>
> This has the double advantage of fixing what you have read more firmly in your mind, and getting you into the habit of using the riches supplied by your reading. Some people have much material stored up so to speak in their vaults, but when it comes to speaking or writing they are remarkably ill-supplied or impoverished. A third result is that whatever the occasion demands, you will have the materials for a speech ready to hand, as you have all the pigeonholes duly arranged so that you can extract just what you want from them. (II. Assembling Materials)
---
class: f20px
## Method of Loci
> One can even twist material to serve the opposite purpose. If you were praising a man for all Seasons, endowed with a versatile and dexterous mind, you could dip into your inconstancy' cupboard and bring out the polyp which changes colour according to the surface beneath it, and then the Euripus, saying that this sea is not so versatile as this man's mind. You could bring out the flame which cannot stand still, the sky which constantly presents a different face, the reed bending according as the breezes blow, and say that it is the mark of a wise man to change his views and his way of life according to events, circumstances, places. Only senseless rocks and the brute earth do not move. Of living creatures, those that are most impressive are the most mobile. In the universe things are nobler the further they are from immobility: earth which does not move is the lowest, then comes water which does move, then air which moves more, then fire which moves even more than air, and finally the heaven which moves most of all. This is why the ancients called the mind of man wind and fire, but the stupid, slow, and foolish they called stones and lead, things to which the word "immovability' is particularly applicable. (II. Assembling Illustrative Material)