---
title: "ENGL 353 Edgeworth"
progress_bar: false
---
class: middle, center

# Maria Edgeworth - From *An Essay on the Noble Science of Self-Justification*
---
class: f50px
## Course Evaluations

.center[
[https://pica.tamu.edu](https://pica.tamu.edu)
]
---
## Purpose?

> Endowed, as the fair sex indisputably are, with a natural genius for the invaluable art of self-justification, it may not be displeasing to them to see its rising perfections evinced by an attempt to reduce it to a science. Possessed, as are all the fair daughters of Eve, of an hereditary propensity, transmitted to them undiminished through succeeding generations, to be "Soon moved with the slightest touch of blame," very little precept and practice will confirm them in the habit, and instruct them in all the maxims of self-justification.
>
> Candid pupil, you will readily accede to my first and fundamental axiom—that a lady can do no wrong. But simple as this maxim may appear, and suited to the level of the meanest capacity, the talent of applying it on all the important but, more especially, on all the most trivial occurrences of domestic life, so as to secure private peace and public dominion, has hitherto been monopolized by the female adepts in the art. (132)
---
## Perfection

> And now, lest fired with ambition you lose all by aiming at too much, let me explain and limit my first principle, "That you can do no wrong." You must be aware that real perfection is beyond the reach of mortals; nor would I have you aim at it; indeed, it is not in any degree necessary to our purpose. You have heard of the established belief in human infallibility which prevailed not many centuries ago, but since that happy period is past, leave the opinions of men to their natural perversity; their actions are the best test of their faith. Instead, then, of a belief in your infallibility, endeavor to enforce implicit submission to your authority. This will give you infinitely less trouble, and will answer your purpose as well. (132)
---
## Defending the Wrong

> Right and wrong, if we go to the foundation of things, are, as casuists tellus, really words of very dubious signification, perpetually varying with custom and fashion, and to be referred to and adjusted, ultimately, by no other standards but opinion and force. Obtain power, then, by all means. Power is the law of man; it is his law and yours.
>
> But to return from a frivolous disquisition about right, let me teach you the art of defending the wrong. (132)
---
## Mere Mortals

> Timid brides, you have, probably, hitherto been addressed as angels-prepare for the time when you shall again become mortal. Take the alarm at the first approach of blame, at the first hint of a discovery that you are anything less than infallible. Contradict, debate, justify, recriminate, rage, weep, Swoon, do anything but yield to conviction.
>
> I take it for granted that you have already acquired sufficient command of voice; you need not study its compass. Going beyond its pitch has a peculiarly happy effect upon some occasions. But are you voluble enough to drown all sense in a torrent of words? Can you be loud enough to overpower the voice of all who shall attempt to interrupt or contradict you? Are you mistress of the petulant, the peevish, and the sullen tones? Have you practiced the sharpness which provokes reply, and the continual monotony which effectually precludes it, by setting your adversary to sleep? An event which is always to be considered as decisive of the victory, or at least as reducing it to a drawn battle-you and Morpheus divide the prize (132-3)
---
## Taste

> Lest amongst infinite variety, the difficulty of immediate selection should at ex you, let me point out that matters of taste will afford you, of all others, the most ample and incessant subjects of debate. Here you have no criterion to appeal to. Upon the same principle, next to matters of taste, points of opinion will afford the most constant exercise to your talents. Here you will have an opportunity of citing the opinions of all the living and dead you have ever known, besides the dear privilege of repeating continually: "Nay, you never must allow that," or, "You can't deny this, for it's the universal opinion-everybody says so: everybody thinks so! I wonder to hear you express such an opinion! Nobody but yourself is of that way of thinking"—with innumerable other phrases with which a slight attention to polite conversation will furnish you. This mode of opposing authority to argument, and assertion to proof, is of such universal utility, that I pray you to practice it. (133)
---
## Reason
> I come now to the art of reasoning-don't be alarmed at the name of reasoning, fair pupils; I will explain to you its meaning…
>
> … If, then, reasonable pupils, you would succeed in argument, follow pretty nearly these instructions.
>
> Begin by preventing, if possible, the specific statement of any position or, if reduced to it, use the most general terms.
>
> Use the happy ambiguity which all languages, and which most philosophers allow. Above all things, shun definitions: they will prove fatal to you, for two persons of sense and candor who define their terms cannot argue long without either convincing, or being convinced, or parting in equal good humor; to prevent which, go over and over the same ground, wander as wide as possible from the point, but always with a view to return at last precisely to the same spot from which you set out. (134-5)
---
## Weapon

> I should remark to you that the choice of your weapons is a circumstance much to be attended to: choose always those which your adversary cannot use. If your husband is a man of wit, you will, of course, undervalue a talent which is never connected with judgment: for your part, you do not pretend to contend with him on wit. But if he be a sober-minded man who will go link by link along the chain of an argument, follow him at first, ’til he grows so intent that he does not perceive whether you follow him or not; then slide back to your own station and, when with perverse patience he has at last reached the last link of the chain, with one electric shock of wit, make him quit his hold, and strike him to the ground in an instant. Depend upon the sympathy of the spectators, for to one who can understand reason, you will find ten who admire wit. 
>
> But if you should not be blessed with a ready wit, if demonstration should in the meantime stare you in the face, do not be in the least alarmed; anticipate the blow which you could neither foresee nor prevent. While you have it yet in your power, rise with becoming magnanimity, and cry, "I give it up! I give it up! La! let us say no more about it. I do so hate disputing about trifles. I give it up!" Before an explanation on the word "trifle" can take place, quit the room with flying colors. (135)
---
## Offensive

> Hitherto we have only professed to teach the defensive; let me now recommend to you the offensive part of the art of justification. As a supplement to reasoning comes recrimination: the pleasure of proving you are right is surely incomplete 'til you have proved that your adversary is wrong. This might have been a secondary, let it now become a primary object with you; rest your own defense on it for further security. You are no longer to consider yourself as obliged to deny, palliate, argue, or declaim, but simply justify yourself by criminating another; all merit, you know, is judged by comparison. In the art of recrimination, your memory will be of the highest service to you; for you are to open and keep an account current of all the faults, mistakes, neglects, and unkindnesses of those you live with. These you state against your own (I need not tell you that the balance will always be in your favor). In stating matters of opinion, produce the words of the very Same person which passed days, months, years before, in contradiction to what he is then saying. By displacing and disjointing words and sentences, by misunderstanding the whole or quoting only a part of what has been said, you may convict any man of inconsistency, particularly if he be a man of genius and feeling, for he speaks generally from the impulse of the moment, and of all others can the least bear to be charged with paradoxes. So far for a husband. Recriminating is also of sovereign use in the quarrels of friends; no friend is so perfectly equable, so ardent in affection, so nice in punctilio, as never to offend. Then note his faults and con them by rote. Say you can forgive, but you can never forget-and surely it is much more generous to forgive and remember than to forgive and forget. On every new alarm, call the unburied ghosts from former fields of battle; range them in tremendous array, call them one by one to witness against the conscience of your enemy, and ere the battle is begun, take from them all courage to engage. (136)
---
## Prolepsis

> Who is there amongst you who cannot or who will not justify when they are accused? Vulgar talent! The sublime of our science is to justify before we are accused. There is no reptile so vile but what will turn when it is trodden on; but of a nicer sense and nobler species are those whom nature has endowed with antennae, which perceive and withdraw at the distant approach of danger. Allow me another allusion; similes cannot be crowded too close for a female taste, and analogy, I have heard, my fair pupils, is your favorite mode of reasoning. The sensitive plant is too vulgar an allusion; but if the truth of modern naturalists may be depended upon, there is a plant which, instead of receding timidly, like the sensitive plant, from the intrusive touch, angrily protrudes its venomous juices upon all who presume to meddle with it. Don't you think that this plant would be your fittest emblem? Let me, however, recommend it to you, nice souls, who of the Mimosa kind, "Fear the dark cloud, and feel the coming storm,” to take the utmost precaution, lest the same susceptibility, which you cherish as the dear means to torment others, should insensibly become a torment to yourselves. (137)
---
## Silence is Safety

> Should a man with persevering temper tell you that he is ready to adopt your sentiments if you will only explain them, should he beg only to have a reason for your opinion-no, you can give no reason. Let him urge you to say something in its defense-no, like Queen Anne, you will only repeat the same thing over again, or be silent. Silence is the ornament of your sex; and, in silence, if there be not wisdom, there is safety. You will, then, if you please, according to your custom, listening to all entreaties to explain and speak with a fixed immutability of posture and a predetermined deafness of the eye which shall put your opponent utterly out of patience, yet still by persevering with the same complacent importance of countenance, you shall half persuade people you could speak if you would. You shall keep them in doubt by the true want of meaning, “which puzzles more than wit." Even because they cannot conceive the excess of your stupidity, they shall actually begin to believe that they themselves are stupid. Ignorance and doubt are the great parents of the sublime. (139)
---
## Obey
> While I write, new precepts rush upon my recollection; but the subject is inexhaustible. I quit it with regret, fully sensible of my presumption in having attempted to instruct those who, while they read, will Smile in consciousness of superior powers. Adieu, then, my fair readers! Long may you prosper in the practice of an art peculiar to your sex. Long may you maintain unrivalled dominion at home and abroad. And long may your husbands rue the hour when first they made you promise *"to obey."* (139)