---
title: "ENGL 353 Vico"
progress_bar: false
---
class: middle, center

# Giambattista Vico - From *On the Study Methods of Our Time*
---
class: f24px
## Discussion Question (Cierra)

> Every study method may be said to be made up of three things: instruments, complementary aids, and the aim envisaged. The instruments presuppose and include a systematic, orderly manner of proceeding; the apprentice who, after suitable training, undertakes the task of mastering a certain art or science, should approach it in an appropriate and well-ordered fashion. Instruments are antecedent to the task of learning; complementary aids and procedures are concomitant with that task. As for the aim envisaged, although its attainment is subsequent to the process of learning, it should never be lost sight of by the learner, neither at the beginning nor during the entire learning process.

According to what we’ve read, and in your own opinion, what are the instruments, complementary aids, and aims envisaged in rhetoric?
---
## Discussion Question (Daisy)

> Just as old age is powerful in reason, so is adolescence in imagination. Since imagination has always been esteemed to a most favorable omen of future development, it should in no way be dulled. Furthermore, the teacher should give the greatest care to the cultivation of the pupil’s memory which though no exactly the same as imagination, is almost identical with it. In adolescence, memory outstrips in vigor all other faculties, and should be intensely trained. Youth’s natural inclination to the arts in which imagination or memory (or a combination of both) is prevalent (such as painting, poetry, oratory, jurisprudence) should by no means be blunted. Nor should advanced philosophical criticism, the common instrument today of all arts and sciences, be an impediment to any of them. The Ancients knew how to avoid this drawback. In almost all their schools for youths, the role of logical was fulfilled by geometry. Following the example of medical practitioners, who concentrate their efforts on seconding the bent of Nature, the Ancients required their youths to learn the science of geometry which cannot be grasped without a vivid capacity to form images. Thus, without doing violence to nature, but gradually and gently and in step with the mental capacities of their age, the Ancients nurtured the reasoning powers of their young men.

---
class: f32px
## Discussion Question (Daisy)
Vico explains the importance in both imagination and memory of the youth. Vico’s argues that the youth have a natural inclination to the arts and it shouldn’t be shunned by anything, including “advanced philosophical criticism”. He places a large value on imagination and memory because he believes it helps pave the way to reasoning. Based on our society do you believe most would agree with him? Also, regarding our educational system, does it align with Vico? If so, how? If not, then what are the harms or benefits from this?

---
class: f26px
## Problem with The New Science

> But, while he discovers a new cosmos of sciences, the great Chancellor proves to be rather the pioneer of a completely new universe than a prospector of this world of ours. His vast demands so exceed the utmost extent of man's effort that he seems to have indicated how we fall short of achieving an absolutely complete system of science rather than how we may remedy our cultural gaps.
>
> This was so, I believe, because those who occupy the heights of power yearn for the immense and the infinite. Thus Bacon acted in the intellectual field like the potentates of mighty empires, who, having gained supremacy in human affairs, squander immense wealth in attempts against the order of Nature herself ...
---
class: f32px
## Knowing as Historically Conditioned

>We, the men of the modern age, have discovered many things of which the ancient were entirely ignorant; the ancients, on the other hand, knew much still unknown to us. We enjoy many techniques which enable us to make progress in some branch of intellectual or practical activity; they likewise had tools for progress in other fields. They devoted all their activity to certain arts which we almost totally neglect; we pursue some others which they apparently scored.

---
class: f24px
## Critique

>Philosophical criticism is the subject which we compel our youths to take up first. Now, such speculative criticism, the main purpose of which is to cleanse its fundamental truths not only of all falsity, but also of the mere suspicion of error, places upon the same plane of falsity not only false thinking, but also those secondary verities and ideas which are based on probability alone, and commands us to clear our minds of. Such an approach is distinctly harmful, since training in common sense is essential to the education of adolescents, so that the faculty should be developed as early as possible; Else they break into odd or arrogant behavior when adulthood is reached. It is a positive fact that, just as knowledge originates in truth and air in fall city, so common sense arises from perceptions based on verisimilitude. Probabilities stand, so to speak, midway between truth and falsity, since things which most of the time are true, are only very seldom false.

---
class: f34px
## Problem of Critique

>Our modern advocates of advanced criticism rank the unadulterated essence of "pure," primary truth before, outside, above the gross semblances of physical bodies. But the study of primal philosophical truths takes place at the same time when young minds are too immature, too unsure, to derive benefit from it.
>
> Just as old age is powerful and reason, so is adolescents in imagination.

---
class: f24px
## Oratory and the Audience
>I may add that in the art of oratory the relationship between speaker and listeners is of the essence. It is in tune with the opinions of the audience that we have to arrange our speech. It often happens that people unmoved by forceful and compelling reasons can be jolted from there apathy, and made to change their minds by means of some trifling line of argument. Consequently, in order to be sure having touch all the soul strings of his listeners, the orator, then, should run through the complete set of the *loci* which schematize the evidence. It is quite unfair to blame Cicero for having insisted on many a point of little weight. It was exactly by those points of little weight that he was able to dominate the law courts, the Senate, and (most important of all) the assemblies of the people. It was by that method that he became the speaker most worthy of being considered a representative of Romes imperial greatness.

---
class: f34px
## Different Modes of Doing

>Whom shall we believe? Arnauld, who rejects the *ars topica*, or Cicero, who asserts that his own eloquence is due to the art of skillfully arraying a set of effective lines of argument? Let others decide; as for me, I am unwilling to award to the one what I would have to take away from the other: I show limit myself to stating that a severely intellectualistic criticism enables us to achieve truth, while *ars topica* makes us eloquent.

---
class: f23px
## The Eloquence-Philosophy Continuum

>It is significant that the representatives of the schools of ancient philosophy became the more eloquent in proportion as they were less inclined to a strictly philosophical criticism. The advocates of stoicism (for whom, as for our modern, pure reason is the regulative standard of truth), were the thinnest in leanest of all philosophers. The epicureans, according to whom the regulative standard of truth resides in sense-perception, were simple and expression, and unfolded their doctrines in more detail. The ancient academics instead, being disciples of Socrates who contended that he knew nothing but his own ignorance, we're masters of an overflowing in lavishly embellished expression. As for the Neo-academics, who admitted that they did not even know that they did not know anything, they overwhelmed their listeners with torrential outbursts and snowdrifts of oratory.

---
class: f21px
## Ethics (Again?!)

>But the greatest drawback of our educational methods is that we pay an excessive amount of attention to the natural sciences and not enough to ethics. Our chief fault is that we disregard that part of ethics which streets of human character, of its dispositions, it's passions, and of the manner of adjusting these factors to public life at eloquence. We neglect that discipline which deals with the differential features of the virtues and vices, with good and bad behavior-patterns, with the typical characteristics of the various ages of men, of the two sexes, of social and economic class, race, and nation, and with the art of seemly conduct in life, the most difficult of all arts. As a consequence of this neglect, a noble an important branch of studies, i.e., the science of politics, lies almost abandoned and untended.
>
>Sense, in our time, the only target of our intellectual endeavors is truth,we devote all our efforts to the investigation of physical phenomena, because their nature seems unambiguous; but we fail to inquire into human nature which, because of the freedom of man's will, is difficult to determine.


---
class: f36px
## Philosophy and Eloquence: Desire

>Two things only are capable of turning to good use the agitations of the soul, those evils of the inward man which spring from a single source: desire. One is philosophy, which acts to mitigate passion in the soul of the sage, so that those passions are transformed into virtues; the other is eloquence, which kindles these passions in the common sort, so that they perform the duties of virtue.

---
class: f22px
## Why Universities / Why Not Universities

>What we need to know is contained in so many books in languages that are extinct, composed by authors belonging to nations long since vanished. These books contain allusions to customs often unknown, in corrupted codices; therefore the taming of any science or art has become so difficult for us, but at the present time no person can master even a single subject. This has made the establishment of universities necessary. In these universities, all branches of knowledge are taught by a number of scholars, each of whom is outstanding in his particular field but this advantage is offset by a drawback. Arts and sciences, all of which in the past where embraced by philosophy and animated by it with a unitary spirit, are, in our day, a naturally separated and destroyed it. In antiquity, floss of hers were remarkable for their coherence; their conduct was in full accord not only with the theories they professed but with their method of expounding them as well.