---
title: 'ENGL 303 Hayles and Pressman'
progress_bar: false
---
class: middle, center

# N. Katherine Hayles & Jessica Pressman <br> "Introduction. Making, Critique: A Media Framework"
---
class: f25px
## Humanities & The Digital Turn
> As traditional print-based humanities move into the digital era, many strategies are emerging to support and retrofit academic departments. Some universities have established freestanding centers for digital humanities, including the University of Maryland, the University of Virginia, and the University of Nebraska. Others are hiring one or more faculty members in the area of digital humanities and incorporating them into an existing department and curriculum. Some are fiercely resisting change and remaining resolutely in the print era. Whatever the case, few have attempted to rethink categories, courses, and faculty hiring in ways that take more than a superficial account of digital technologies and their implications for disciplines that have been operating on a print-based model of scholarship. This book is intended to promote such rethinking. (vii)
---
class: f31px
## Print is Itself a Medium
> The approach we advocate is comparative and media focused. It recognizes that print is itself a medium, an obvious fact that tends to be obscured by its long dominance within Western culture. *As the era of print is passing, it is possible once again to see print in a comparative context with other textual media*, including the scroll, the manuscript codex, the early print codex, the variations of book forms produced by changes from letterpress to offset to digital publishing machines, and born-digital forms such as electronic literature and computer games. (vii)
---
class: f29px
## Print-born Assumptions
> … Western cultures have relied to a greater or lesser extent on print …  the comparative media project remains as open ended and challenging as ever. Indeed, if anything, it has become more complex in the last couple of decades. In the new millennium, the media landscape is changing far faster than our institutions, so we now find ourselves in situations where print-born assumptions linger and intermingle with practices such as social media networking, tweeting, hacking, and so on, to create highly diverse and heterogeneous social–technical–economic–political amalgams rife with contradictions and internal inconsistencies. (viii)
---
class: f21px
## Writing as Complex Process
> The advantages of a comparative approach, then, have never been clearer. But why focus on media, and textual media in particular? … [W]riting surfaces have always been complex, reaching beyond the surface deep into the surrounding culture. Yet when writing was accomplished by a quill pen, ink pot, and paper, it was possible to fantasize that writing was simple and straightforward, a means by which the writer’s thoughts could be transferred more or less directly into the reader’s mind. With the proliferation of technical media in the latter half of the nineteenth century, that illusion became much more difficult to sustain, for intervening between writer and reader was a proliferating array of technical devices, including telegraphs, phonographs, typewriters, Dictaphones, Teletypes, and wire recorders, on up to digital computing devices that themselves are splitting into an astonishing array of different protocols, functionalities, interfaces, and codes. The deepening complexities of the media landscape have made mediality, in all its forms, a central concern of the twenty-first century. With that changed cultural emphasis comes a reawakening of interest in the complexities of earlier media forms as well. (ix)
---
class: f22px
## End of Critique
> As many have noted, the culture of critique that has dominated the humanities for the last several decades seems, as Bruno Latour (2004) phrased it, to have “run out of steam.” There are many reasons for this, including the culture and science wars, the economic downturn that has resulted in the disestablishment of many interdisciplinary programs, and the low esteem in which the humanities are held by the general public. Another important reason may be that critique has ceased to operate as a fruitful method for many scholars and for most beyond the academy; it often yields results that are apt to seem more formulaic than insightful, and it speaks to an isolated audience. The complexity of these factors notwithstanding, there is also a fundamental problem with the culture of critique: by its nature, it tends to be critical rather than constructive in tone. As someone once said, only partly with tongue in cheek, it amounts to saying to others, “Give me your best ideas and I will show you what’s wrong with them,” a proposition that has struck many colleagues in the social and natural sciences as a bad bargain indeed. (xiv)
---
class: f28px
## Ethic of Making
> One way to analyze literature that emphasizes its connections to the real world and to other fields of intellectual inquiry is through a focus on media. We suggest that CTM promotes a paradigm shift, a move from a culture in which critique dominates to one in which it is put into productive tension and interplay with what may be called an ethic of making. (xv)

> Moreover, an ethic of making shifts the emphasis from deconstructing existing ideologies and practices to constructing new kinds of practices. Both are undoubtedly necessary, but the culture of critique by itself is only half the picture. (xvii)
---
class: f28px
## Collaborative Research/Teaching
> Thus humanities research has been something of an anomaly in the academic production of knowledge, for virtually all of the science disciplines, and most of the social sciences, use a teamwork model in which researchers at many levels—professors, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduates—work together on large-scale projects that might stretch over many years (and many grant cycles). Indeed, most of the world’s work gets done through teams working together. Students majoring in the humanities typically come into this world with little practice in such work environments, a less than optimum situation for their integration into it. (xvi)
